Course Title: AQF200 Primary Production - Aquaculture and Fisheries Course contents:  The students will gain an overview of the fishery and aquaculture industry in the world. Within fishery topics will include; overview over relevant species, nutrient chains, fishing seasons, fishing gears (function and optimal use), gears effect in fish quality, fishing vessels, initial fish Processing (on shore or at sea), by catch/by product handling, regulations, quotas, international agreements: structural changes in the fish industry and sustainable fishery. Within the Aquaculture sector lectures will include relevant species, production cycles, different production systems, water quality requirements, fish feeding, fish breeding, fish health and diseases, fish welfare, sustainable aquaculture, harvesting and slaughtering of fish.  Learning outcome:  The requirement for fish and seafood in the word is increasing. This can either be harvest from the sea, traditionally fishery or it can be produces trough aquaculture. These are complex systems and productions that may interfere with each other and on to the surrounding environment. The overall aim with the course is to give the students the necessary basic information about fishery and aquaculture. This should be set in overall view so the students are able to critically evaluate the factors which are important for a sustainable growth in the industry. A student who has met the objectives of the course will be able to: - discuss advantages and disadvantages with the two aquatic food primary production systems, fishery and aquaculture - discuss important factors for performing a sustainable fishery and a sustainable aquaculture Course responsible:  Odd Ivar Lekang   Teachers:  Kristoffer Larsen Kvame   ECTS credits:  7.5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  The course can be taken as a full E-learning course in autumn parallell.It is also possible to follow real lectures in AQX 251 in the august bloc, because part of the courses are identical..     Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2012-2013   Preferential right:  Master AQ-food

Course Title: AQF210 Aquatic Food Processing and Technology Course contents:  Students will gain an overview of how processing and storage conditions influence the quality and shelf life of aquatic food. The students will be given an introduction to fish muscle as a raw material for different processing procedures. Muscle structure, muscle biochemistry, and biochemical processes after death (rigor) in relation to quality and processability will be reviewed. The composition and use of by-products will also be reviewed. An overview of different prosessing methods, both traditional and novel, will be given. Finally packaging of fish and fish products will be reviewed.  Learning outcome:  A student who has met the objectives of the course will be able to: give an overview of the muscle structure and biochemistry of fish as well as the most common storage and processing methods used on fish and fish products, and be able to discuss how different processing and storage parameters will influence the product quality and the shelf life. Course responsible:  Odd Ivar Lekang   Teachers:  Kristoffer Larsen Kvame   ECTS credits:  7.5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2012-2013   Preferential right:  aq-food

Course Title: AQF220 Safety and Human Health Effects of Aquatic Food Course contents:  The course will allow student to identify hazards and to discuss how processing, distribution and consumer handling will influence safety and health effects of aquatic food. Relevant biological and chemical hazards in aquatic food are presented including pathogenic bacteria, viruses, parasites, aquatic biotoxins, histamine/biogenic amines and industrial and environmental contaminants. Quantitative microbial ecology, mathematical modelling and software are included for evaluation and management of hazards during processing and distribution of aquatic food to the end-consumers. Functional aquatic food components (omega-3 fatty acids, vitamin D, proteins/peptides, taurine, selenium, iodine, chitosan, antioxidants, polysaccharides, macro algae) and their beneficial human health effects are presented and evaluated in relation to regulations, health claims and risk benefit analysis.The course includee-learning with webinars and it is important that students have access to Internet and can be reached by e-mail.  Learning outcome:  A student who has met the objectives of the course will be able to: - Describe basic concepts of aquatic food risk analysis. - Apply the HACCP system for safety management of aquatic food. - Describe human health benefits of aquatic food consumption. - Evaluate and compare risks and human health benefits of aquatic food consumption. - Explain human health benefits of specific functional aquatic food components. - Analyse data from database about aquatic food-borne diseases outbreaks - Apply predicative microbiology software to evaluate microbial hazards in aquatic foods - Review and analyse data in a synthetic report - Critically analyse "hot topics"related to safety and health of aquatic foods Course responsible:  Odd Ivar Lekang   Teachers:  Kristoffer Larsen Kvame   ECTS credits:  7.5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2012-2013

Course Title: AQF231 Marine Resources,  Research and innovation  Course contents:  Students will gain an insight into the newest research and developments within the marine resources sector, including new product development, technological and processing advances, novel analytical quality assessment techniques, as well as obtain a holistic view of the many aspects affecting seafood processing and handling, all from the effects of catching/harvesting ground to the development of marine products and their effect on the human body during their consumption.Amongst covered topics are processing novelties and optimization, robotics and automation within seafood processing, technical advances in quality analytics, novelties in product development including 3D food printing from marine resources, fish protein and peptide processing, micro-plastics hazards in the marine food chains, marine bioactive compounds, as well as characterization, processing and product development of marine raw materials and underutilized side streams. The course is a mandatory part of the Aquatic Food Production joint Nordic M.Sc. program (www.aqfood.org ).  Learning outcome:  After completing this course students should be able to:Describe the newest developments within technological, processing and product development of marine raw materialsIdentify and describe the main processing steps and their effect on quality and safety of marine productsIdentify side streams and underutilized raw materials from marine resourcesDiscuss possible product developments of underutilized raw materials from marine resourcesDiscuss and critically assess environmental and health impacts on marine products, such as the introduction of micro-plastics into the food chain etc.Demonstrate familiarity with the newest products development trends from marine resources, such as 3D printing, fish protein processing and more.Apply and evaluate gained knowledge in a case-based project and report writing Course responsible:  Odd Ivar Lekang   Teachers:  Kristoffer Larsen Kvame   ECTS credits:  7.5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2019-2020   Preferential right:  AQ-food

Course Title: AQP211 Production Technology in Aquaculture Course contents:  The course gives a general survey of production technology for aquatic organisms, with focus on intensive farming where Norwegian salmon farming is used as an example. Knowledge is given in production of broodstock, juvenile and ongrowing. The students will be given an overview of central working operations, site selection, maintenance, production hygiene and regulation for juvenile and ongrowing production. There will be lectures in production planning and making of production plans, including evaluation and optimizing of plans, in addition to a survey of investments and running cost for major technical equipment. The students shall make their own production plans for respectively juvenile and ongrowing farms through two exercises, including common routines and major working operations. Lectures will also be including production management, production control, design of production control systems and routines for deviation. A main aim with the course will be overall and practical understanding of the production.  Learning outcome:  Upon completion of the course, the students will:Have general knowledge in production of aquatic organisms, with focus of salmonids.Know how to produce broodstock, juvenile and adult fishKnow how to evaluate and optimize the most important working operations on a juvenile and ongrowing farm.Knowledge to make a production plan for a juvenile and ongrowing farm.Know which factors are important to optimize the production on a juvenile and ongrowing farm.Know which factors affect the production velocity, how they may be changed, and what are the effects of this.Know procedures for season independent smolt production.Know how to performe site evaluations and know site selection criteria.Know how to prepare documents for production control and propose efforts with deviation.Be able to prepare working plans for smolt production and ongrowing production farms.Know maintenance routines/plans for smolt production and ongrowing production.Be able to estimate investment and running cost for main components in smolt and ongrowing farms.Know laws and regulations that have affect on the production planning. Course responsible:  Kristoffer Larsen Kvame   Teachers:  Odd Ivar Lekang   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in January block. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2012-2013

Course Title: AQP350 Planning and Design of Intensive Fish Farms Course contents:  Through the course, the students will gain new knowledge as well as utilize previously acquired knowledge in a process where they will plan and design an intensive land-based fish farm. The plan will be adapted for an actual site and an actual production. Topics for lectures are design and dimensioning of inlet, transfer pipelines, pump stations, fish handling, feed handling, farm design, site selection, superstructure principles, room program, planning and technical design.  Learning outcome:  Be able to design a land-based fish farm included a production plan for intensive fish farming Course responsible:  Kristoffer Larsen Kvame, Odd Ivar Lekang   Teachers:  Kristoffer Larsen Kvame   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2012-2013

Course Title: AQT251 Laboratory Course in International Aquaculture Course contents:  The course will focus on production methods, mainly for Atlantic salmon and rainbow trout. In the laboratory exercises, the students will learn about aspects in intensive fish farming that is important to attain good production and good fish welfare. There will be exercises in measuring of the water quality and using of equipment to improve the water quality. There will also be exercises in controlling other types of equipment used on a fish farm.  Learning outcome:  The students shall get practical insight in technical equipment used in international fish farming. The focus is on land-based fish farms and production methods. Course responsible:  Kristoffer Larsen Kvame   Teachers:  Bjørn Reidar Hansen, Odd Ivar Lekang   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in the Autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2014-2015

Course Title: AQT254 Basic Aquaculture Engineering Course contents:  The course provides an overview of technical equipment used in aquaculture production, how it is constructed and how it functions.The course consists of three modules:1. Water transport: The module includes an introduction to hydrodynamics, an overview of typical pipes and fittings and an introduction to water pumps.2. Water quality and water treatment: The module adresses water quality parameters, as well as water purification equipment, typical in fish farming. This includes particles, pH, nitrogen compounds, dissolved gases in water, disinfection and heating / cooling.3. Production units and other necessary equipment: Various production units, including sea cages, ponds, tanks and hatching equipment. Other equipment includes feeding equipment, measuring instruments and more.  Learning outcome:  The aim of the course is to give the student basic knowledge on technical equipment, methods and systems that are nessessary for aquaculture production. Course responsible:  Kristoffer Larsen Kvame   Teachers:  Odd Ivar Lekang   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2012-2013

Course Title: ARK100 Architecture and Sustainability I Course contents:  Architecture and sustainability I: Form, space, order and architectural methods.The course includes an introduction in form, shape, order and architectural composition, including a basic course in model building and colour. In addition to lessons and practical workshops the course includes basic techniques oaf architectural communication (plans, sections, facades, perspective and oral presentation). The course is organised around a small project that has to be designed according to program, site, terrain and architectural concept.  Learning outcome:  The students will obtain a basic understanding of conceptual thinking and communication in architecture. The student will be able to develop and present a small architectural design through drawings, model and oral description. Course responsible:  Martin Ebert   Teachers:  Eva Gabrielle Héléne Bergh   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  Spring semester   Course frequency:  yearly   First time:  Study year 2021-2022

Course Title: ARK110 Architecture and Sustainability II Course contents:  Digital methods in architectural planningBased on the course Architecture and Sustainability I (ARK100) this course will provide a deeper introduction in architectural theory, sustainability and designing methods.The house focuses especially on digital methods and sustainable architecture.The Cours includes a basic course in CAD, 3D-modelling and BIM. The course is based on software such as ArchiCAD, SketchUp and Solibri.  Learning outcome:  The students will be given the ability to design a building of low complexity (for example a one-family-house) in CAD and apply basic principles of sustainable design in the process. Under this course students will obtain basic knowledge of digital collaboration and design processes.   Course responsible:  Eva Gabrielle Héléne Bergh   Teachers:  Martin Ebert   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  Spring semester   Course frequency:  yearly   First time:  Study year 2021-2022

Course Title: ARK200 Architecture and Sustainability III Course contents:  Architectural and environmental design of buildings with medium complexity. The course sets a special focus on building with massive wooden elements (CLT).Based on the courses Architecture and Sustainability I and II the focus shifts to complex projects, for example a multi-family housing project. Central elements of the course will be site analysis, architectural concept, sustainable design and detailing. The course teaches basic knowledge of the Norwegian building code (TEK17) with special focus on universal design. The course is based on practical experience in  CAD-programs (f.eks. ArchiCAD) which is subject of earlier courses (ARK110).  Learning outcome:  The course will teach the students to design an architectural project of medium complexity based on site analysis, program and principles of sustainability. Course responsible:  Leif Daniel Houck   Teachers:  Martin Ebert   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  Spring semester   Course frequency:  yearly   First time:  Study year 2022-2023

Course Title: ARK300 Architecture and Sustainability IVCourse responsible:  Eva Gabrielle Héléne Bergh, Martin Ebert, Leif Daniel Houck   ECTS credits:  15   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   First time:  Study year 2022-2023   Last time:  2022H

Course Title: DAT110 Introduction to Data Analysis and Visualisation Course contents:  Introduction to elementary data analysis based on modern tools - Datatypes and loading of data from various file formats.- Visualization and explorative analysis for identification of structure and trends (histograms, scatterplots, box-plots etc.).- Some simple statistics (mean, median, variance etc.). - Correlation and covariance (of single variables and matrix data).- Crosstables.- Elementary normal distribution theory, normalizing transformations and testing for normality.- Geometric distributions, binomial distributions, Poisson-distributions.- Inference (parametrical and non-parametrical for investigation of one and two samples) and simple analysis of variance.- Least squares modelling (linear and polynomial fit).- Logistic regression (classification with two groups).- Smoothing of time-dependent data.- Cluster analysis (k-means, hierarchical clustering etc.).  Learning outcome:  Skills and insight into basic data analysis techniques based on modern data collection. The student will learn to choose appropriate methods for1) Explorative data analysis (plotting/visualisation and descriptive statistics),2) Visualisation,3) Inference,4) Modelling and prediction with continous and categorical responses (regression and classification) and validation of predictive models.5) Introduction to cluster analysis and smoothing of time series data.  Course responsible:  Kristin Tøndel   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in the Spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2019-2020

Course Title: DAT121 Introduction Course for Data Scientists Course contents:  This course provides an introduction to Data Science (data analysis methods and tools) for students in the 2-year Master of Data Science program, to prepare students from a wide range of backgrounds for the advanced courses in the master program.  Learning outcome:  You will be prepared to follow 200-level courses in the Master of Data Science program, having developed sufficient compentence and skills in data analysis. Course responsible:  Kristin Tøndel   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the August block. This course has teaching and evaluation during the August block.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2019-2020   Preferential right:  Master in Data Science

Course Title: DAT200 Applied Machine Learning Course contents:  Introduction to basic machine learning methodology using modern, powerful computing tools. The methodology covered includes:preprocessing and arranging of data: feature extraction (PCA, LDA), feature selection/importance, visualisation, scaling, formatting of data types.clustering: among other K-meansclassification: KNN, logistic regression, LDA, SVM, decision treesregression: OLS, regularisation, polynomial regression, tree based methods, PCR, PLSstrategies for model validation and parameter optimisationThe course will give an introduction to the basic theoretical properties of the methods, but has main focus on applied modelling using real data. The students will learn to build effective and accurate models that, depending on the application, can contribute to several of UN's sustainability goals, among others 3, 11, 12, 14, 15.  Learning outcome:  Skills and insight into basic techniques for machine learning. Basic understanding of various models' mathematical properties and operations. The student will learn to master analysis methods suited for 1) Explorative data analysis (diagnose and visualisation), 2) Pre-processing of data from various sources, 3) Modelling and prediction med continuous and categorical responses (regression and classification) and validation of predictive models. The student will learn to connect problems with choice of appropriate analysis methods. Course responsible:  Oliver Tomic   Teachers:  Fadi al Machot   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  The starts in the spring parallel.The course will be taught / graded in the spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2017-2018

Course Title: DAT300 Applied Deep Learning Course contents:  DAT300 builds upon subjects students have learned in DAT200 - Applied Machine Learning. The covered methodology may include:Foundations of artificial neural networks (NN)Deep convolutional neural networks (CNN)Recurrent neural networks (RNN)Basic processing and analysis of out-of-core data setsThe course will introduce the theoretical basics of the methods discussed and focus heavily on applications and modelling with real data. The students will learn to build effective and accurate models that, depending on the application, can contribute to several of UN's sustainability goals, among others 3, 11, 12, 14, 15.  Learning outcome:  Good skills and insight into basic techniques for machine learning and deep learning. Basic understanding of various models' mathematical properties and operations. The student will learn to master analysis methods suited for 1) General purpose Machine Learning, 2) Sequence analysis, 3) image classification. The student will learn to connect problem characteristics with choice of appropriate learning algorithms. Course responsible:  Fadi al Machot   Teachers:  Oliver Tomic   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  The starts in the autumn parallel.The course will be taught / censored in the autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2018-2019

Course Title: DAT310 Modern multivariate methods Course contents:  .  Learning outcome:  . Course responsible:  Kristin Tøndel   Teachers:  Kristian Hovde Liland   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  .   Course frequency:  .   First time:  Study year 2020-2021

Course Title: DAT320 Sequential and time series data analysis Course contents:  The course provides a theoretical and practical introduction to handling, processing, and analyzing data with dependence along one axis, such as sequential or time series data. The course focuses on applications from biology, industrial applications, and finance. The following topics will be covered:preprocessing of time series datastochastic processes and propertiesforecasting of time series dataanomaly/outlier detection in time series dataclassification/clustering in time series dataThe course presents statistical and machine learning approaches. Students will learn to build effective and accurate models that, depending on the application, can contribute to several of UN's sustainability goals, among others 3, 11, 12, 14, 15.  Learning outcome:  Insight into relevant problems and models to analyze sequential and time series data from statistics and machine learning perspectives. Basic understanding of properties and definitions related to time series analysis. Practical hands-on experience in preprocessing, analyzing, and interpreting results for real-world datasets. Course responsible:  Oliver Tomic   Teachers:  Stefan Schrunner, Kristian Hovde Liland   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  Autumn parallel   Course frequency:  Yearly   First time:  Study year 2022-2023

Course Title: DAT390 Data Science Seminar Course contents:  The students acquire knowledge about current topics in data science through individual work, including the study of scientific publications, recent monographies, analysis projects or other suitable methods. They systematise and share the knowledge in oral and written form.  Learning outcome:  You acquire in-depth knowledge about a specific topic in data science, you learn to present knowledge in written and oral form according to the standards of the field, and will gain an overview of current developments in data science. Course responsible:  Kristin Tøndel   Teachers:  Habib Ullah   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  The course starts in the autumn parallel.The course will be taught / censored in the autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2018-2019

Course Title: FYS007 Preparatory Physics Course contents:  Repetition of basic high-school physics.  Learning outcome:  Basic study techniques and competencies in physics to prepare for FYS101 and FYS100. Course responsible:  Mareile Astrid Wolff   ECTS credits:  0   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  January block   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2012-2013

Course Title: FYS100 Physics and Environment Course contents:  Topic-based. Students work on physics topics (examples in parentheses) related to the topics: Biophysics (light, electrical fields, radioactivity), Climate (mechanics, gas laws, electromagnetic radiation), Bioenergy (the study of heat, induction, a. c.), Solar energy (atomic- and nuclear physics, electric circuits).Contents: movement (kinematics) and its cause (dynamics), with special emphasis on the idea of energy and the conservation laws of mechanicsthe physical properties of fluidsthe thermal properties of solids and gases and the main theorems in the study of heatwave movement, light and opticselectricity, magnetism and electromagnetic radiationsimple atomic theory and radiation physics.  Learning outcome:  To understand and be able to use basic ideas and laws of nature.To acquire the scientific language and terms of the sciences.To understand how simple principles can be used for describing complicated phenomena in nature.To understand how physics can be applied and used for understanding biological systems, renewable energy production and climate changes.To experience how closely interwoven the various science disciplines really are.To become motivated to continue their studies working with a common toolbox from all disciplines of sciences.Students are to be given an operative understanding of the most important physical ideas, the basic physical way of thinking and the ability to analyse and solve quantitative problems on:movement (kinematics) and its cause (dynamics), with special emphasis on the idea of energy and the conservation laws of mechanicsthe physical properties of fluidsthe thermal properties of solids and gases and the main theorems in the study of heatwave movement, light and opticselectricity, magnetism and electromagnetic radiationsimple atomic theory and radiation physicsThe students should also be familiar with and understand central problems concerning biological physics, climate and climate change and renewable energy (solar energy and bioenergy).Students are to be able to:analyse a described problem by applying basic laws and principles of physicssolve calculation exercises by applying basic laws and principles of physicsexplain how phenomena in biology and in environmental physics can be explained qualitatively on the basis of the fundamental laws and principles of physicscooperate on learning and problem-solvingsee the connection between physics and other natural sciences.The students shall understand why an elementary knowledge of physics is necessary in order to understand and describe nature and be able to understand and analyse environmental problems.The students are also to understand that physics and the natural sciences are man-made tools that we use to explore nature and that nature itself always is the key to an answer. Course responsible:  Gaute Tomas Einevoll   Teachers:  Aurora Rosvoll Grøndahl, Maren Anna Brandsrud, Achim Kohler, Petter Hieronymus Heyerdahl   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2004-2005

Course Title: FYS101 Mechanics Course contents:  Lectures, 4 hours per week. Exercises and supervised colloquia, 4 hours per week. 3250 hours over 15 weeks equals 17 hours per week. Topics: Kinematics and dynamics, fluid dynamics, waves, relativity, gravity.  Learning outcome:  The students should be able to understand and use: basic principles in mechanics, understand how basic principles are used to describe complex natural phenomena, conservation laws, understand and use mathematical models in mechanical systems, fluid mechanics and waves, understand the mechanical models of contemporary society, understand that mechanics is used to model natural phenomena and that basic principles in mechanics are necessary for evaluating environmental consequences, be able to descibe different wave phenomena and the movement of light both quantitatively and qualitatively, describe, understand and calculate physical laws in non-accelerated coordinate systems, Newton's law of gravity. The aim of the course is for the students to understand how physics describes both natural and man-made systems and their behaviour. The students should be able to interpret physical laws using mathematical language. The students will learn to use  laws and formulas to analyse and calculate complex physical systems. Course responsible:  Ruth Heidi Samuelsen Nygård   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2009-2010

Course Title: FYS102 Thermophysics and Electromagnetism Course contents:  Teaching structure: Two 2-hour lectures per week. One 2-hour problem solving lecture per week, and one 2-hour problem solving class per week.Contents: Pressure, temperature, density, energy, physical properties of pure substances,  state equations, energy transport by heat, work and mass. 1st and 2nd law of thermodynamics. Heat capacity. Entropy. Cyclic processes. Heat engines, refrigeration, heat pumps. Electrostatics and charge. Electric forces and fields. Electric current, circuits and circuit elements. Magnetic fields and forces. Electromagnetic induction. Alternating currents. Generators, transformers . Electromagnetic radiation. Light. Interference and diffraction.  Learning outcome:  Thermal physics: The aim is to understand and master the fundamental principles of classical macroscopic thermal physics. The student should be able to calculate important parameters for machines that produce or use energy and work.Understand and be able to use the laws of thermodynamics and fundamental thermodynamics parameters.Be able to describe, understand and calculate: Properties of pure substances, energy transport and energy use in cyclic processes.Solve and analyse mathematical models for energy conservation, energy transport and conversion.Understand thermodynamical principles that contribute to effective energy use in our industrial society.Electromagnetism and optics: The aim is to understand and master the fundamental principles of classical electromagnetism and optics. The student should be able to analyse simple electrical circuits, systems and electric motors, and understand how simple circuit components function.Electrostatics and charge. Electrical forces and fields. Electrical current and circuits. Magnetic fields and forces. Electromagnetic induction. Alternating currents. Maxwell's equations. Electromagnetic spectrum. Light. Interference and diffraction.The students should be able to:Analyse and solve physical and technical problems.Explain natural phenomena using fundamental laws and principles.The student should understand how fundamental knowledge of physics can be used to describe the world we live in and to develop our technological society. Course responsible:  Cecilia Marie Futsæther   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in the autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2009-2010

Course Title: FYS102A Physics for Biotechnologists Course contents:  Teaching structure: About one 2-hour lecture per week one average distributed over 13 weeks. One 2-hour problem solving lecture per week, and one 2-hour problem solving class per week. Estimated workload is 125 hours distributed over 15 weeks (approximately 8 hours per week). Contents: Pressure, temperature, density, energy, physical properties of pure substances, state equations, energy transport by heat, work and mass. 1st and 2nd law of thermodynamics. Heat capacity. Entropy. Cyclic processes. Heat engines, refrigeration, heat pumps. Electrostatics and charge.Electric forces and fields. Electric current, simple circuits. Magnetic fields and forces. Electromagnetic induction. Electromagnetic radiation.  Learning outcome:  - Acquire an understanding of and be able to master the basic principles of classical macroscopical thermodynamics and electromagnetism. Be able to use mathematics as a tool for calculations and modelling of elementary thermodynamic and electromagnetic phenomena.- Understand and be able to analyze different forms of energy transport and cyclic processes using the laws of thermodynamics, thermodynamic parameters, and properties of pure substances.- Become able to formulate, solve and interpret mathematical models for energy conservation, transport and conversion.- Understand the principles of thermal physics that contribute to efficient energy use in our modern/industrial society.Students are expected to understand the key topics of basic electromagnetism. Topics covered are: Electrostatics. Electric current, electric circuits, electric forces and fields. Magnetic forces and fields. Electromagnetic induction. Electromagnetic radiation.Students should understand that basic knowledge of physics is fundamental for understanding natural phenomena and technology, for developing technology and that physics and the natural sciences are man-made tools developed for this purpose. Course responsible:  Cecilia Marie Futsæther   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in the autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2012-2013

Course Title: FYS103 Experimental methods and data analysis Course contents:  During the first two weeks of the January block there are lectures and exercises. At the end of the second week, a midterm exam will be conducted. In the January block, there will be three laboratory exercises. The laboratory exercises and related results must be presented through a report.In the spring parallel, a total of three laboratory exercises shall be carried out. All exercises must be submitted as a written report. One is to be prepared as an oral presentation held in the June block.  Learning outcome:  To be able to evaluate the results of measurements and measurement uncertainties.To be able to perform error analysis.To get known to basic principles of multivariate data analysis.To understand the basis principle of some important spectroscopic measurement techniques.To be able to give a structured presentation of measurement results.To be able to make a written report.To be able to present lab results orally. Course responsible:  Achim Kohler   Teachers:  Fredrik Arnesen Stulen   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  96   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in January block. This course has teaching and evaluation in the January block, the spring semester and the June block. The course has the major part of the labs in the spring part.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2010-2011   Preferential right:  Ranking:1.            students who have the course as mandatory in their study plan2.            students on the following study programmes: B-EMF, M-LUN, M-MF, M-BA, M-GEOM, M-IØ, M-MPP, M-VM, B-GEOM3.            students with most ECTS creditsIt there are not enough slots in group one the students will be ranked by their ECTS credits.Students taking the course for the first time have lab priority.

Course Title: FYS110 Statics Course contents:  Lectures: 28 hours on systems of forces, decomposing and combining forces, moment of a force, resultant force, distributed forces, equilibrium and conditions of equilibrium, plane trusses, beams and hydrostatics. To illustrate the topics in practice, 56 additional hours of calculation exercises with homework are included, where several selected problems will be solved in cooperation/through discussion with the students.  Learning outcome:  You will learn to understand and use basic principles in statics, will be able to mathematically calculated forces on simple constructions due to loads from externally applied loads, the weight of construction elements themselves, wind and water.  Course responsible:  Egil Stemsrud   Teachers:  Henrik Folke Holmberg   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in January block. This course has teaching/evaluation in January block, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2004-2005

Course Title: FYS140 Climate change, sustainability and adaptation Course contents:  The Earth’s climate, and climate change through history. Weather and meteorology. Radiation balance, carbon cycle and greenhouse effect. Current climate change, causes and consequences. Climate scenarios. Climate risk, and climate policy. Emissions mitigation, and adaptation to a new climate.The course replaces FYS161 - Meteorology and Climate  Learning outcome:  Students are to understand the basic physical principles behind the Earth’s weather and climate, and how and why they are currently changing. The students will also understand the connections between climate, society and climate risk, and the present and future consequences of man-made climate change. The students will be able to discuss the future evolution of the climate, possible measures for mitigating human emissions, and how we can adapt to a new climate, in light of climate resilient and sustainable development. Course responsible:  Bjørn Hallvard Samset   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Yearly   First time:  Study year 2022-2023

Course Title: FYS141 Meteorology for sustainable developmentCourse responsible:  Mareile Astrid Wolff   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   First time:  Study year 2023-2024

Course Title: FYS155 Laboratory Course in Physics Course contents:  The course consists of about 11 laboratory exercises in mechanics, electromagnetism and thermal physics. In addition, there may be arranged an excursion. Students working in pairs are required to prepare for every experiment by reviewing the relevant theory and problems before the actual laboratory day. Next, a joint introductory seminar will discuss the equipment, method and theory before pairs of students go on to do the experiments. The experiment and report are completed in the same session, and the report is handed in before students leave the laboratory.  Learning outcome:  To understand and be able to use ideas and basic principles of physics in practical laboratory work. To understand and be able to use scientific methods. To gain practical knowledge of and skills in the ideas and principles of laboratory work. To understand how simple principles can be used to describe complicated phenomena in nature.Students are to be able to conduct and explain experiments and exercises in physics on topics selected from the academic contents of FYS101 and FYS102. The students should especially be able to:keep an exact and clearly set out journal for the laboratory workwork in a structured and planned mannerkeep the laboratory tidy, also when conducting experiments or exercisescooperate and communicate with the students in the lab groupuse logging equipment for collecting datause statistics programs, graph-drawing programs and similar for processing and presenting data and results.Students are to understand why basic knowledge in physics is necessary to understand and describe nature and to understand, use and develop technology. The students are also to understand that physics and science are man-made tools that we use to explore nature and that nature itself is always the key to an answer. Course responsible:  Arne Auen Grimenes, Mareile Astrid Wolff   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  60   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2010-2011   Preferential right:  Ranking:1.            students who have the course as mandatory in their study plan2.            students on the following study programmes: M-LUR, M-MF, B-EMF3.            students with most ECTS creditsIt there are not enough slots in group one the students will be ranked by their ECTS credits.Students taking the course for the first time have lab priority.

Course Title: FYS203 Interaction of light and matter, laboratory Course contents:  The course will give a theoretical background for understanding absorption of light in matter. Different examples that are relevant for photonics will be studied, such as energy converting materials, absorption in spectroscopy and interaction of light with detector materials. The students will perform practical laboratory projects where for each project they will obtain a theoretical background, go through the specific lab, prepare the lab, perform the lab work, analyze the results, and write a report or give an oral presentation.  Learning outcome:  The students will get a theoretical background and practical experience in fundamental concepts of light interaction with matter, in order to be able to describe theoretically and study experimentally the interaction of light and matter. The students will get knowledge in how to plan and perform an experiment. The students will gain skills in communicating scientific results, through reports and oral presentations. They will be able to analyze and critically evaluate various sources of information and use them to structure and formulate scholarly arguments. Course responsible:  Achim Kohler   Teachers:  Johanne Heitmann Solheim, Maren Anna Brandsrud   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  30   Teaching exam periods:  Spring semester.   Course frequency:  Yearly.    First time:  Study year 2022-2023   Preferential right:  Photonics students have priority

Course Title: FYS230 Electrical Engineering Course contents:  The course starts out by repeating the electrical principles from the study of electromagnetism, relevant for this course. We will then cover the principles, construction, output, properties and fields of application of various electrical machines.  Learning outcome:  You will understand that all transformation of energy in machines follows the law of induction: Voltage is induced when an electrical conductor experiences a varying magnetic field. You will see that a dynamo, a generator, a motor, a transformer, a loudspeaker, a microphone, a cassette player and the read/write head in a computer disk are in theory similar machines. You will become familiar with some different machine types such as the induction machine also called asynchronous machine, the synchronous machine, the direct current generator and motor and transformers of various kinds. In the same way, you are to understand the difference between direct current, alternating current, single phase systems, three-phase systems and you will be able to conduct elementary calculations on machines in simple networks. You will also understand the ideas of efficiency, active and reactive power and some important roles that they play in small and large energy systems. Course responsible:  Petter Hieronymus Heyerdahl   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  Maximum 64 persons can have lab in January. See Norwegian text above.   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in autumn parallel and January-block.See Norwegian text above on possible laboratory course in the June block.    Course frequency:  Annually.   First time:  Study year 2010-2011   Preferential right:  Ranking:1.            students who have the course as mandatory in their study plan2.            students on the following study programmes:  B-EMF, M-MF, M-MPP, M-IØ, M-RB, M-LUR3.            students with most ECTS creditsIt there are not enough slots in group one the students will be ranked by their ECTS credits.Students taking the course for the first time have lab priority.

Course Title: FYS235 Electronics Course contents:  You will get an introduction to semiconductor physics, electronic components, analysis of simple electrical networks, nonlinear electronic components such as diode and transistors, signal processing, instruments used in electronics and operational amplifiers.   Learning outcome:  You will gain basic understanding of designing and building simple electronic circuits, to find and correct circuit errors and be happy when it works properly. You will learn to use basic electronic instruments, power supplies and function generators. Course responsible:  Jagath Sri Lal Senanayaka, Ruth Heidi Samuelsen Nygård   Teachers:  Fredrik Arnesen Stulen   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  90   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in spring parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2012-2013   Preferential right:  See Norwegian text

Course Title: FYS236 Electrodynamics Course contents:  Lectures: Two hours per week where central topics in the course are discussed. Exercises: Two hours per week where the students work individually or in groups of two with problem solving, and where a teacher will help if necessary. Computer laboratory: two hours per week, where electromagnetism topics are simulated with COMSOL.The course covers:Electromagnetism with the application of vector fields: Coulomb's law, Gauss law, dielectric materials, Poisson's and Laplace's equations, the Biot-Savart law, Faraday's law, Maxwell's equations in differential form, electromagnetic waves.  Learning outcome:  Obtain a good understanding of electromagnetism and the laws used in computation. To understand how electromagnetism can be described by vector fields.  Course responsible:  Ruth Heidi Samuelsen Nygård   Teachers:  Øven Andreas Grimenes   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN, NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in the spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2017-2018

Course Title: FYS241 Environmental Physics Course contents:  Nuclear physics: radioactivity and decay, interactions of radiation with matter, biological effects of radiation, dose calculations, radiation protection, applications of nuclear physics, fission, fusion.Climate physics: composition and thermodynamics of the atmosphere, aerosols and clouds, solar radiation, the earth's radiation budget, the greenhouse effect and climate change, climate models, elementary stratospheric chemistry and the ozone layer.  Learning outcome:  Obtain comprehensive understanding of ionising radiation and climate change.Understand how radiation is produced, measured and interacts with matter. Key topics are radioactive decay processes, interaction mechanisms, biological, health and environmental effects of ionising radiation, nuclear fission and fusion, reactor physics, commercial nuclear reactors. The relationship between dose terms, radiation dose calculations and the evaluation of these in relation to international recommendations on radiation protection should be well understood.The student should obtain good understanding of how global changes in the radiation climate and the composition of the atmosphere affect the environment as a whole. The global effects of the release of greenhouse gases and the greenhouse effect should be well understood.The student should be able to evaluate risks associated with environmental problems, for both the individual and society. Course responsible:  Cecilia Marie Futsæther   Teachers:  Mareile Astrid Wolff   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in the spring parallel and the June block.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2006-2007

Course Title: FYS245 Quantum Physics Course contents:  Lectures and calculation exercises will be evenly spread throughout the teaching period. The course covers the fundamental principles and topics in quantum mechanics:LightWave mechanicsTime-independent Schrödinger equation.One-dimensional potentialsPrinciples of Quantum mechanicsQuantum mechanics in three dimensionsIdentical particlesSolid state physics  Learning outcome:  To get an introduction in the field of quantum physcs.To understand basic concepts in quantum physics.To be able to analyze and solve problems in quantum physics.To be able to solve problems in quantum physics numerically. Course responsible:  Achim Kohler   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2015-2016

Course Title: FYS251 Heat Transfer Course contents:  The first part covers important concepts in thermodynamics, heat transfer and physical chemistry. A detailed overview of heat transfer mechanisms is given including heat conduction, convection and radiation. Furthermore, lectures on design, construction and dimensioning of heat exchangers will be given.  Learning outcome:  After completing the course, the students shall have an understanding of heat transfer. They shall be able to perform calculations on conduction, convection and radiative heat tranfer, and beeing able to identify heat transfer conditions and which equations to use. The student shall be able to distingush with steady-state and transient heat transfer. The students shall also be able to select type of heat exchanger and calculate the dimensions of heat exchangers for use in various areas. Course responsible:  Odd Ivar Lekang   Teachers:  Ola Sørby Omberg, Even Bull Holmen, Kristoffer Larsen Kvame   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2012-2013

Course Title: FYS252 Thermodynamics and Statistical Physics Course contents:  Basic fundamental thermodynamics concepts and its application in different scenarios. Introduction to the energy cycles, ideal and real cycles process and their efficiency.Fundamentals on ideal gas mixture, thermodynamics property relations and introduction to phase and chemical equilibriumBasic concepts on Statistical Physics such as Boltzmann distribution, Kinetics theory of gases, and emsembles.  Learning outcome:  Students will be given the fundamental of thermodynamics and its applications to energy industry. Students will be taught to describe, understand and calculate various forms of energy transport and work-producing and work-consuming cyclic processes. The student is to be able to apply the necessary thermodynamics and other general physics in order to understand how we can make the most of our energy resources and use various energy transformation principles.The students will have an introduction to ideal gas mixtures and the simple models of gases or vapor mixtures. Thermodynamic property relations will be introduced. Their use will be presented with focus on its use for statistical thermodynamics. Introduction to real gas behavior and equations of state for gasses will be presented as well.Chemical reaction equilibrium will be presented and the students will be taught how to calculate the equilibrium constant and thermodynamic properties at equilibrium conditions. Industrial applications will be presented as well (chemical reactors)Students will be given an introduction to statistical physics and the implications of its use. The students will be introduce to the statistical behavior and probabilistic analysis of the matter and its properties. Students will faced how microscopic properties affects macroscopic properties of the matter. Course responsible:  Jorge Mario Marchetti   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2017-2018

Course Title: FYS252A Applied Thermodynamics Course contents:  Basic fundamental thermodynamics concepts and its application in different scenarios. Introduction to the energy cycles, ideal and real cycles process and their efficiency.  Learning outcome:  Students will be given the fundamentals of thermodynamics and its applications to the energy industry world. Students will be taught to describe, understand and calculate various forms of energy transport and work-producing and work-consuming cyclic processes. The student is to be able to apply the necessary thermodynamics and other general physics in order to understand how we can make the most of our energy resources and use various energy transformation principles. Course responsible:  Jorge Mario Marchetti   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2017-2018

Course Title: FYS272 Energy Physics  Course contents:  Principles for conversion and transformation between forms of energy.  Overview of the worldwide available renewable energy resources.  Applications of conversion from primary forms of energy such as bioenergy, energy in the motion of fluids, and solar energy.  Principles for energy storage.  Conventional conversion of fossil energy superficially.  Processes for carbon capture and storage.  Institutional and economic factors.  Learning outcome:  Studentene skal ha innsikt i praktiske industrielle anvendelser innenfor energiproduksjon og energiomsetning. Studentene skal ha god kjennskap til fornybare og ikke-fornybare energikilder. Studentene skal kunne anvende termodynamikk og annen generell fysikk for å forstå hvordan en kan utnytte aktuelle energiressurser og bruke ulike energiomformingsprinsipper. Studentene skal forstå prinsipper og bruksområder for ulike måter å lagre og fordele energi på. Course responsible:  Espen Olsen   Teachers:  Ivar Loland Råheim   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2017-2018

Course Title: FYS301 Spectroscopy of Biological Materials and Data Analysis  Course contents:  The course is taught in June and in the following autumn semester. The first part of the course is a part of the BioSpec Summer School. Pre-courses need to be delivered before the start of the summer school. See  https://www.nmbu.no/en/faculty/realtek/research/groups/biospectroscopy/summerschool for teaching period. In the autumn parallel, an individual study on infrared spectroscopy will be performed by all students. The study in the autumn semester will be supported by seminars. For the BioSpec Summer School, lectures and tutorials will be evenly spread throughout the teaching period. The course covers the principles of spectroscopy and data science for analysis of data from biophotonics. It gives an introduction to biological data obtained with analytical methods, with a special focus on spectroscopy. The course contains training in data analysis through tutorials and working as an expert in a multidisciplinary team. Furthermore, special focus will be given on the development of personal presentation skills. The course covers:  Spectroscopic techniques Analytical methods in biology Principal Component Analysis Basic methods of pre-processing for spectroscopic data Advanced pre-processing methods such as Mie correction and fringes correction Multivariate methods for clustering Basic regression Machine learning methods for regression and classification Deep learning methods Data analysis of hyperspectral images Introduction to the machine learning software platform Orange/Quasar   Learning outcome:  Gain multidisciplinary knowledge in biology, spectroscopy and data analysis.Improve theoretical and practical knowledge in data analysis of high-dimensional biological data including hyperspectral imaging data.Acquire skills for working in an international and multidisciplinary team.Acquire presentation skills through presenting the results of the course project.Improve theoretical and practical knowledge within biophotonics and gain an overview of the analytical methods used in the field.Improve theoretical knowledge in the interaction between light and biological matter.Get insight into how the discipline has evolved and impacted society through invited lectures about applications of biophotoncis and data science.Be able to carry out interdisciplinary analyses with colleagues from other academic fields.Acquire skills to analyze and critically evaluate various sources of information and use them to structure and formulate scholarly arguments.Improve communication skills about academic issues, analyses and conclusions in the field, both with specialists and the general public.Get an overview over different spectroscopic techniquesGet practical experience with infrared spectroscopyAcquire presentation skills through presenting the results of individual work Course responsible:  Achim Kohler   Teachers:  Johanne Heitmann Solheim, Maren Anna Brandsrud, Volha Shapaval   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  25   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in June block and has teaching in June block and Autumn parallel. This course has evaluation in Autumn parallel. The course is taught early.   Course frequency:  Yearly   First time:  Study year 2022-2023   Preferential right:  Master students in photonics have priority.

Course Title: FYS301 Spectroscopy of Biological Materials and Data Analysis  Course contents:  The course is taught in June and in the following autumn semester. The first part of the course is a part of the BioSpec Summer School. Pre-courses need to be delivered before the start of the summer school. See  https://www.nmbu.no/en/faculty/realtek/research/groups/biospectroscopy/summerschool for teaching period. In the autumn parallel, an individual study on infrared spectroscopy will be performed by all students. The study in the autumn semester will be supported by seminars. For the BioSpec Summer School, lectures and tutorials will be evenly spread throughout the teaching period. The course covers the principles of spectroscopy and data science for analysis of data from biophotonics. It gives an introduction to biological data obtained with analytical methods, with a special focus on spectroscopy. The course contains training in data analysis through tutorials and working as an expert in a multidisciplinary team. Furthermore, special focus will be given on the development of personal presentation skills. The course covers:  Spectroscopic techniques Analytical methods in biology Principal Component Analysis Basic methods of pre-processing for spectroscopic data Advanced pre-processing methods such as Mie correction and fringes correction Multivariate methods for clustering Basic regression Machine learning methods for regression and classification Deep learning methods Data analysis of hyperspectral images Introduction to the machine learning software platform Orange/Quasar   Learning outcome:  Gain multidisciplinary knowledge in biology, spectroscopy and data analysis.Improve theoretical and practical knowledge in data analysis of high-dimensional biological data including hyperspectral imaging data.Acquire skills for working in an international and multidisciplinary team.Acquire presentation skills through presenting the results of the course project.Improve theoretical and practical knowledge within biophotonics and gain an overview of the analytical methods used in the field.Improve theoretical knowledge in the interaction between light and biological matter.Get insight into how the discipline has evolved and impacted society through invited lectures about applications of biophotoncis and data science.Be able to carry out interdisciplinary analyses with colleagues from other academic fields.Acquire skills to analyze and critically evaluate various sources of information and use them to structure and formulate scholarly arguments.Improve communication skills about academic issues, analyses and conclusions in the field, both with specialists and the general public.Get an overview over different spectroscopic techniquesGet practical experience with infrared spectroscopyAcquire presentation skills through presenting the results of individual work Course responsible:  Achim Kohler   Teachers:  Johanne Heitmann Solheim, Maren Anna Brandsrud, Volha Shapaval   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  25   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in June block and has teaching in June block and Autumn parallel. This course has evaluation in Autumn parallel. The course is taught early.   Course frequency:  Yearly   First time:  Study year 2022-2023   Preferential right:  Master students in photonics have priority.

Course Title: FYS373 Chemical and Biochemical Energy Conversion Course contents:  Fundamental knowledge of reaction kinetics. Fundamental understanding for reactor design. Data analysis and interpretation. Mathematical methods for design kinetics expression and fitting with experimental data. General overview of catalyst used and how the kinetics expressions are modified in case of homogeneous, heterogeneous or bio systems. Simple as well as multiple reactions will be studied in different systems (Liquid-liquid, gas-gas, etc).  Learning outcome:  Students will be given the fundamental of chemical and biochemical conversion and its applications. Students will be taught the chemical kinetics of a process reaction, the interpretation of the results and the design of industrial reactors (ideal and non-ideal scenarios). The student will learn about the relevance of knowing the conversion ratio and how this is related to the energy production as well as energy sustainability of a process. The students will learn the know-how of design chemical reactors for different scenarios and will learn different cases such as adiabatic, isothermal, and auto-thermal equipment. Course responsible:  Jorge Mario Marchetti   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Every second year: odd years   First time:  Study year 2012-2013

Course Title: FYS374 Electrochemical Energy Conversion Course contents:  Principles for electrochemical energy conversion and thermodynamicsElectromotive force and capacitanceElectrode materialsElectrode reactionsChoice of commercially available systems  Learning outcome:  The course is aimed at giving competence in principles and technology for electrochemical conversion of energy. Course responsible:  Jorge Mario Marchetti, Jorge Mario Marchetti   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course has teaching/evaluation in the autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Starts in 2018 and it will be given every second year   First time:  Study year 2014-2015

Course Title: FYS375 Energy Technology, Laboratory Course contents:  Perform practical laboratory projects and simulations where you for each procjet: study the theory for the process, go through the specific lab, prepare running the lab, do the lab work, analyze the results, and write a report.  Learning outcome:  All energy must be converted from its source form (sun, biomass, wind, elevated water) into a useful form (light, movement, comfort).After the course, you will:Understand some important energy conversion processes.Have been running three real energy converters. Conducted measurements on real converters.Acquired experience with project management.Acquired a sense of dimensions related to, power, efficiency and environmental impacts of energy conversion. Course responsible:  Petter Hieronymus Heyerdahl   Teachers:  Fredrik Arnesen Stulen, Tom Ringstad   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  40   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2012-2013   Preferential right:  1: M-MF, M-LUR energimaster2: M-IØ energimaster3: M-MPP

Course Title: FYS376 Solar Energy Course contents:  IntroductionThe sun as energy sourcePrinciples of photovoltaic solar cellsFrom sand to solar cellsPV systemsSolar heat absorbersSolar heat systemsEnvironmental aspects  Learning outcome:  The course will make the student capable of understanding the concepts of solar energy conversion devices. Course responsible:  Espen Olsen   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course runs in the Spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually if needed.   First time:  Study year 2012-2013   Preferential right:  M-MR, M-MF, M-IØ og M-MPP

Course Title: FYS377 Digital Electrical Power Systems Course contents:  Our electric power systems face major restructuring. For example, they will be carbon-free and undergo a switchover to digitization. One challenge is that a larger part of the electricity will be generated in distributed renewable, uncontrollable, often local sites with different performance in large numbers. At the same time the system should be able to handle heavy sources and sinks for electric power and energy by building HVDC cables to other countries and that nuclear power is phased out in Sweden. Well-functioning electric power and energy transfer will be an important key to switch to renewable society for secure exchange of electrical energy and power quality. The course will provide a deeper insight and understanding of our complex power systems. The course will also provide insight into how ICT and computer sciences are used to plan, monitor, manage and maintain tomorrow's power system. The course highlights how modern IT technology can be used in existing power systems is now undergoing considerable changes in terms of both manufacturing, transfer and use of electrical energy and power.   Learning outcome:  Get a basic understanding of the future digital European electric power system:Introduction to electric power grids and power systems, requirements for power systems.Load from a system perspective. Consumption and power tariffs, load profiles and duration curves.The power system's infrastructure - Overhead lines, cables, stations etc, plant management, real-time monitoring and risk analyzes.Basic transformer theory. Equivalent circuits for real transformers and per-unit system.Modeling of transmission lines. Two-port network and ABCD parameters. Approaches for short and medium lines. Differential equations for long transmission lines.Power flow analysis. Python-based solutions of linear algebraic equations (Gaussian elimination, Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel) and iterative solutions of nonlinear algebraic equations with Newton-Raphson.Use of Power World for simulation of larger power systems.Political framework for the current power system, reasons for changes, more renewable energy, changes in production and consumption (for example electrical vehicles).Grid planning - N-1 criterion, probabilistic methods. Norway's power system in a European perspective.Operation and marketing solutions for electric power systems, PMU (Power Management Unit), real-time control.Challenges and trends in the current power system, power system balance, frequency quality, stability analysis, power reserve in rotating masses. Course responsible:  Ruth Heidi Samuelsen Nygård   Teachers:  Benjamin Schäfer   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  Autumn parallell   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2014-2015   Preferential right:  M-MF, M-IØ, M-MPP

Course Title: FYS388 Computational Neuroscience Course contents:  Selected topics related to mathematical modelling of (i) signal processing in nerve cells, (ii) neural coding and decoding, (iii) receptive fields in the visual system, (iv) information transmission in the nervous system, (v) biophysics of nerve cells, (vi) biological neural networks, and (vii) learning and memory.  Learning outcome:  Gain a comprehensive understanding of how the properties of neurobiological systems can be modelled mathematically and be able to navigate in the academic literature on computatiional neuroscience. Be able to formulate and solve simple models from computational neuroscience. Be able to navigate in and acquire knowledge from scientific literature in the subject field in order to be able to develop more complicated models. Understand that mathematical models are necessary in order to understand complex neurobiological processes. Course responsible:  Gaute Tomas Einevoll   Teachers:  Hans Ekkehard Plesser   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  Fall parallel   Course frequency:  Annually (next time 2021)   First time:  Study year -1

Course Title: FYS401 Spectroscopy of Biological Materials and Data Analysis  Course contents:  The course is taught in June and in the following autumn semester. The first part of the course is a part of the BioSpec Summer School. Pre-courses need to be delivered before the start of the summer school. See  https://www.nmbu.no/en/faculty/realtek/research/groups/biospectroscopy/summerschool for teaching period. In the autumn parallel, an individual study on infrared spectroscopy will be performed by all students. The study in the autumn semester will be supported by seminars. For the BioSpec Summer School, lectures and tutorials will be evenly spread throughout the teaching period. The course covers the principles of spectroscopy and data science for analysis of data from biophotonics. It gives an introduction to biological data obtained with analytical methods, with a special focus on spectroscopy. The course contains training in data analysis through tutorials and working as an expert in a multidisciplinary team. Furthermore, special focus will be given on the development of personal presentation skills. The course covers:  Spectroscopic techniques Analytical methods in biology Principal Component Analysis Basic methods of pre-processing for spectroscopic data Advanced pre-processing methods such as Mie correction and fringes correction Multivariate methods for clustering Basic regression Machine learning methods for regression and classification Deep learning methods Data analysis of hyperspectral images Introduction to the machine learning software platform Orange/Quasar  Learning outcome:  Gain multidisciplinary knowledge in biology, spectroscopy and data analysis.Improve theoretical and practical knowledge in data analysis of high-dimensional biological data including hyperspectral imaging data.Acquire skills for working in an international and multidisciplinary team.Acquire presentation skills through presenting the results of the course project.Improve theoretical and practical knowledge within biophotonics and gain an overview of the analytical methods used in the field.Improve theoretical knowledge in the interaction between light and biological matter.Get insight into how the discipline has evolved and impacted society through invited lectures about applications of biophotoncis and data science.Be able to carry out interdisciplinary analyses with colleagues from other academic fields.Acquire skills to analyze and critically evaluate various sources of information and use them to structure and formulate scholarly arguments.Improve communication skills about academic issues, analyses and conclusions in the field, both with specialists and the general public.Get an overview over different spectroscopic techniquesGet practical experience with infrared spectroscopyAcquire presentation skills through presenting the results of individual work Course responsible:  Achim Kohler   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  5   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in June block and has teaching in June block and Autumn parallel. This course has evaluation in Autumn parallel. The course is taught early.   Course frequency:  Yearly   First time:  Study year 2022-2023   Preferential right:  The course is only for students in photonics

Course Title: FYS401 Spectroscopy of Biological Materials and Data Analysis  Course contents:  The course is taught in June and in the following autumn semester. The first part of the course is a part of the BioSpec Summer School. Pre-courses need to be delivered before the start of the summer school. See  https://www.nmbu.no/en/faculty/realtek/research/groups/biospectroscopy/summerschool for teaching period. In the autumn parallel, an individual study on infrared spectroscopy will be performed by all students. The study in the autumn semester will be supported by seminars. For the BioSpec Summer School, lectures and tutorials will be evenly spread throughout the teaching period. The course covers the principles of spectroscopy and data science for analysis of data from biophotonics. It gives an introduction to biological data obtained with analytical methods, with a special focus on spectroscopy. The course contains training in data analysis through tutorials and working as an expert in a multidisciplinary team. Furthermore, special focus will be given on the development of personal presentation skills. The course covers:  Spectroscopic techniques Analytical methods in biology Principal Component Analysis Basic methods of pre-processing for spectroscopic data Advanced pre-processing methods such as Mie correction and fringes correction Multivariate methods for clustering Basic regression Machine learning methods for regression and classification Deep learning methods Data analysis of hyperspectral images Introduction to the machine learning software platform Orange/Quasar  Learning outcome:  Gain multidisciplinary knowledge in biology, spectroscopy and data analysis.Improve theoretical and practical knowledge in data analysis of high-dimensional biological data including hyperspectral imaging data.Acquire skills for working in an international and multidisciplinary team.Acquire presentation skills through presenting the results of the course project.Improve theoretical and practical knowledge within biophotonics and gain an overview of the analytical methods used in the field.Improve theoretical knowledge in the interaction between light and biological matter.Get insight into how the discipline has evolved and impacted society through invited lectures about applications of biophotoncis and data science.Be able to carry out interdisciplinary analyses with colleagues from other academic fields.Acquire skills to analyze and critically evaluate various sources of information and use them to structure and formulate scholarly arguments.Improve communication skills about academic issues, analyses and conclusions in the field, both with specialists and the general public.Get an overview over different spectroscopic techniquesGet practical experience with infrared spectroscopyAcquire presentation skills through presenting the results of individual work Course responsible:  Achim Kohler   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  5   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in June block and has teaching in June block and Autumn parallel. This course has evaluation in Autumn parallel. The course is taught early.   Course frequency:  Yearly   First time:  Study year 2022-2023   Preferential right:  The course is only for students in photonics

Course Title: FYS473 Chemical and Biochemical Energy Conversion Course contents:  Fundamental knowledge of reaction kinetics. Fundamental understanding for reactor design. Data analysis and interpretation. Mathematical methods for design kinetics expression and fitting with experimental data. General overview of catalyst used and how the kinetics expressions are modified in case of homogeneous, heterogeneous or bio systems. Simple as well as multiple reactions will be studied in different systems (Liquid-liquid, gas-gas, etc).  Learning outcome:  Students will be given the fundamental of chemical and biochemical conversion and its applications. Students will be taught the chemical kinetics of a process reaction, the interpretation of the results and the design of industrial reactors (ideal and non-ideal scenarios). The student will learn about the relevance of knowing the conversion ratio and how this is related to energy production as well as energy sustainability of a process. The students will learn the know-how of design chemical reactors for different scenarios it will learn different cases such as adiabatic, isothermal, and auto-thermal equipment. Course responsible:  Jorge Mario Marchetti   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually. The course will be given in 2017 and then every second year   First time:  Study year 2015-2016

Course Title: FYS474 Electrochemical Energy Conversion Course contents:  Engelsk:Principles for electrochemical energy conversion and thermodynamics. Electromotive force. Capacity. Electrode materials. Electrode reactions. Choice of commercially available systems.  Learning outcome:  The course is aimed at giving competence in principles and technology for electrochemical conversion of energy. Course responsible:  Jorge Mario Marchetti   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course has teaching/evaluation in fall parallel.   Course frequency:  Starts in 2018 and it will be given every second year   First time:  Study year 2015-2016

Course Title: FYS476 Solar Energy Course contents:  IntroductionThe sun as energy sourcePrinciples of photovoltaic solar cellsFrom sand to solar cellsPV systemsSolar heat absorbersSolar heat systemsEnvironmental aspects  Learning outcome:  The course will make the student capable of understanding the concepts of solar energy conversion devices. Course responsible:  Espen Olsen   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in the spring parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually if needed.   First time:  Study year 2015-2016   Preferential right:  M-MR, M-MF, M-IØ og M-MPP

Course Title: FYS488 Computational Neuroscience Course contents:  Selected topics related to mathematical modelling of (i) signal processing in nerve cells, (ii) neural coding and decoding, (iii) receptive fields in the visual system, (iv) information transmission in the nervous system, (v) biophysics of nerve cells, (vi) biological neural networks, and (vii) learning and memory.  Learning outcome:  Gain a comprehensive understanding of how the properties of neurobiological systems can be modelled mathematically and be able to navigate in the academic literature on computatiional neuroscience. Be able to formulate and solve simple models from computational neuroscience. Be able to navigate in and acquire knowledge from scientific literature in the subject field in order to be able to develop more complicated models. Understand that mathematical models are necessary in order to understand complex neurobiological processes. Course responsible:  Gaute Tomas Einevoll   Teachers:  Hans Ekkehard Plesser   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  Fall parallel   Course frequency:  Annually (next time 2021)   First time:  Study year 2015-2016

Course Title: GMBB100 Remote Sensing in Geomatics Course contents:  Lectures: Basic physical principles. Photographical image acquisition. Digital image acquisition. Digital image processing. Use of aircraft and satellites as sensor platforms. Analog and digital aerial photogrammetry. Satellite mapping. Multispectral imagery and classification techniques. Integration of images in geographical information systems. Use of laser scanning (LIDAR) and radar-based techniques (InSAR) for generation of digital terrain models (DTM).Exercises: Introductory exercise on the use of images. Presentation of multispectral satellite images by using the image processing program MultiSpec. Measurement in aerial photographs. Use of pocket and mirror stereoscopes, demonstration of stereoscopic vision. Digital image processing. Classification of a multispectral satellite image. Search for satellite images in catalogues on the Internet. Airplane and satellite images as part of the information content of a GIS. Orienteering in the field based on aerial photographs and satellite images. Excursions: Visits to Blom Geomatics AS and Norwegian Space centre at Skøyen in Oslo.  Learning outcome:  After completing the course, the student is to have knowledge of how various types of images taken by airplanes and satellites can be used in connection with the production of topographic maps, thematic maps and digital terrain models (DTM). The student is to be familiar with the basic principles for analog and digital acquisition of images, as well as the most commonly used methods for analog and digital representation of images. The student is to be aware of the basic principles and the historical development in the field of conventional photogrammetry, be aware of how digital image processing can be utilised in connection with both aerial photographs and satellite images. The student is to have knowledge of the conditions necessary for aerial photographs and satellite images to be integrated in geographical information systems (GIS). Knowledge about how laser scanning (LIDAR) and radar-based techniques (InSAR) can be used for generation of digital terrain models (DTM)will also be achieved. Course responsible:  Cecilie Rolstad Denby   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in January. This course has teaching/evaluation in January.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2004-2005

Course Title: GMBB201 Image Processing in Geomatics Course contents:  Lectures: The geometric and radiometric properties of satellite imagery. Geometric rectification/geocoding. Single-image photogrametry with emphasis on SPOT scenes. Control of geometric accuracy. Special image enhancement techniques. Mosaic production. Classification methods with emphasis on unsupervised classification. Use of satellite images for vegetation mapping. Evaluation of classification results. Image matching and filtering.Exercises: Geometric rectificataion. Measurement of terrain elevation in oblique scene. Image matching. Special image processing methods: Pan-sharpening and mosaicing. Unsupervised classification (clustering) and field control.Excursion: Field work in the Oslo-area.  Learning outcome:  Have knowledge of the most central ideas connected with the types of digital image processing that are relevant in geomatics, as well as be able to carry out such types of image processing, interpretation and analysis using a selected image processing tool (currently ERDAS Imagine). Through doing the compulsory exercises, the students are to become skilled in working in small, efficient groups. Through the writing of exercise reports, the students are to have gained skills in relevant presentation techniques through the use of suitable software. When using satelite pictures, the students are to see the opportunities and limitations that satelite images have as an integrated part of geographical information systems (GIS), used in connection with landscape planning, natural management and environmental monitoring . Have completed a field survey that forms the basis for the ability to assign information classes to spectral classes resulting from unsupervised classification. Have knowledge about and an understanding of image processing methods that are used for automatic measurement techniques in images. Course responsible:  Ivar Maalen-Johansen, Cecilie Rolstad Denby   Teachers:  Ivar Maalen-Johansen   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN, NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  The course starts in the June block. The course has teaching/evaluation in the June block.   Course frequency:  Every year.   First time:  Study year 2006-2007

Course Title: GMBB300 Remote Sensing, Raster Graphics and Landscape Visualisation Course contents:  Lectures: Pixel representation and image formats. Satellite mapping and GPS. The use of GPS for control point determination. The use of matching for controlling the geometric accuracy of satellite images. Satellite image stereo-photogrammetry. Automated terrain model production. Digital terrain models in raster format. 3D-visualisation. The use of imaging Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR). Interferometrical use of SAR. Fourier transformation of images.Exercises: Exercise 1: Determination of the structure of picture files with unknown formats. Import, processing and converting of image files. Exercise 2: GPS-based determination of ground control points and control of the result using an image-matching technique. Exercise 3: Digital terrain models in raster format.Excursion: A visit to Norwegian Defence Research Establishment Norwegian Computing Centre) and the Department of Geosciences, University of Oslo.  Learning outcome:  After completing the course, the student is to have obtained substantial knowledge about and have practical experience with a limited number of selected techniques that are relevant for use in connection with mapping-techniques based on various types of remote sensing from airborne and spaceborne platforms. Course responsible:  Dagrun Aarsten   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN, NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2015-2016

Course Title: GMFO120 Photogrammetry 1 Course contents:  Lectures: The process of photogrammetric mapping. Flight planning. Aerial cameras. The perspective projection. Transformations. Internal and external orientation. Quality and control.Exercises: Rotation matrices. Central projection in space. Accuracy of coordinates and maps.  Learning outcome:  To gain knowledge and understanding of the basic principles of photogrammetry and get an introduction to the process of photogrammetric mapping. Course responsible:  Ivar Maalen-Johansen   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in the Spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2004-2005

Course Title: GMFO205 Photogrammetry 2 Course contents:  Lectures: The perspective projection. Linearisation and differential formula, formula development. Estimation of external orientation elements, Spatial re-section. Aerial triangulation, bundle block adjustment. Sources of error and quality. Mapping with drone. Relevant standards. Digital elevation models - production and use of, accuracy in DEM. Digital elevation models - interpolation and production of contour lines. Image matching. Ortophotos - production and use, accuracy of ortophotos. Digital aerial cameras - principles and modes of operation, geometrical and radiometric properties. Airborne laser scanning - introduction, instruments, principles, modes of operation, accuracy, fields of usage.Exercises: Exterior orientation of a single image using bundle adjustment. Image matching. Project: Mapping with drone.    Learning outcome:  The students should have knowledge, understanding and some practical skills related to the orientation of images (taken from airplanes and satellites). This includes knowledge and understanding of the mathematical, optical and photographical basis of photogrammetry, the perspective projection, 3D-transformations and model deformations. Further, knowledge of and an understanding of various types of photogrammetric measurement and digital mapping, through both manual and automated methods, as well as the processing of data for presentation. In addition, practical skills in the use of relevant software. Introductory knowledge of airborne laser scanning is also included. Course responsible:  Ivar Maalen-Johansen   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in the Autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2008-2009

Course Title: GMFO310 Close-Range Photogrammetry Course contents:  Lectures: Methods in Close-range photogrammetry. Camera, camera calibration. Image processing. Digital photogrammetry for industrial purposes. Terrestrial laser scanning. Other 3D-modeling methods.   Learning outcome:  The students should have knowledge and understanding of the theoretical basis and methods of close-range photogrammetry, technology and products for 3D-modelling. This includes knowledge of and skills related to image-based methods, for instance calibration, measurement, modelling and presentation. The students should also have basic knowledge in terrestrial laser scanning and practical skills in planning, measuring and to a certain extent processing of laser scanned data. Course responsible:  Ivar Maalen-Johansen   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in January block. This course has teaching/evaluation in January block.   Course frequency:  Yearly   First time:  Study year 2004-2005

Course Title: GMFO320 Airborne Laser Scanning Course contents:  Colloquium meetings: Introduction with history, principles and application fields. Basic introduction to instruments, signal properties, distance measurement using a laser, geometrical conditions when recording, sources of error, operational conditions. Sensor orientation, system calibration and stripe levelling. Applications in terrain modeling, building extraction, forestry and engineering. Exercises: Theory exercises + processing of laser data.  Learning outcome:  The goal of the course is to create a foundation for understanding the underlying technology, principles and mode of operation needed to produce terrain and surface models through the use of airborne laser scanning. In addition, emphasis will be placed on understanding relevant problems related to system functionality, system calibration and accuracy in the resulting data. Course responsible:  Ivar Maalen-Johansen   Teachers:  Dagrun Aarsten   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  30   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in the Autumn parallel   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2003-2004

Course Title: GMGD200 Geodesy Course contents:  The course gives an introduction to: basic geodetic calculations, map projections, height systems and physical geodesy. The course deals with subjects such as: coordinate systems, spherical geometry, ellipsoidal geometry, geodetic direct- and indirect problems, linear transformations, geometrical corrections and height systems.  Learning outcome:  Students are given an introduction to geometric and physical geodesy. Course responsible:  Jon Glenn Omholt Gjevestad   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2018-2019

Course Title: GMGD222 Applied Satellite Geodesy Course contents:  Autumn semester:Celestial and terrestrial reference systems. Time systems. Precession, nutation and polar motion. Theory of Kepler orbits. Perturbations. Space geodetic observation techniques. International organisations and available information in electronic networks.Spring semester:System description GNSS, coordinat and time systems, observables, error sources, modelling of observations, observation and processing methods, applications. Some of the topics are presented by students. Lab exercises are intensively used.  Learning outcome:  Autumn semester:The students must know reference systems used in space geodesy and understand the theoretical foundation for satellite motion in space. They must be updated on the individual space geodetic observing techniques and satellite systems and be familiar with international organisations and their services (IERS, IGS etc.).Spring semester:Master the theoretical fundament for positioning using GNSS, different GNSS-observation techniques and different GNSS data-processing techniques. Course responsible:  Ola Øvstedal   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel.This course has teaching in both autumn and spring semester and evaluation in both semester.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2018-2019

Course Title: GMGD230 Marine Geodesy Course contents:  The role of the ocean in the Earth system, properties of seawater, geodetic mapping of ocean currents, sea-level changes, marine observation techniques, ocean tides, reference levels at the sea, underwater acoustics, and nautical charting.  Learning outcome:  The students should understand the role of the ocean as an important indicator of climate change, the basic principles of nautical charting, and how ocean currents, sea-level change, and ocean topography can be mapped by geodetic methods. Course responsible:  Kristian Breili   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel,   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2018-2019

Course Title: GMGD310 Physical Geodesy Course contents:  The course covers mathematical models and methods used for describing Earth's gravity field: gravitation, rotation and potential, terrestrial and satellite gravimetry, geoid computation and height systems, including elements from parameter estimation and statistics.The Department of Geomatics educates candidates who, upon completion of their degree, will be able to contribute to reaching the following selected Sustainable Development Goals: (3) Good Health and Well-being, (6) Clean Water and Sanitation, (9) Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure, (11) Sustainable Cities and Communities, and (13) Climate Action.Geodesy concerns monitoring variations in the Earth's shape, gravity field, and rotation, i.e., dynamic processes linked to geophysics, hydrology, cryosphere, atmospheric science, ocanography, and climate change. The measured changes span timescales from seconds to decades, with some processes continuing over thousands (postglacial rebound) or millions (plate tectonics) of years. As such, geodesy forms a fundamental tool for monitoring the Earth system, and, in turn, developing strategies for sustainable adaptation of human behavior to it.A key concern is the continued improvement of infrastructure, which is decisive for the development of sustainable cities and communities. For example, an improved vertical reference frame will give more reliable predictions of future sea-level rates, which in turn will be used for coastal planning and climate studies. A global geodetic reference frame is understood as critical infrastructure, which long-term maintenance is the concern of the UN-GGIM Subcommittee on Sustaining the Global Geodetic Reference Frame (https://www.unggrf.org/).  Learning outcome:  The students will learn the theoretical basis for computation methods and measurement techniques in physical geodesy, and apply this to problems in geoid computation and height systems.By the end of the course, the students will be able to describe a physical reference system including its gravity field, perform measurements with relative and absolute gravimeters, implement numerical computation methods for the determination of Earth's gravity field and the geoid, and apply these to gravity data from terrestrial and satellite-based sensors. Course responsible:  Vegard Ophaug   Teachers:  Christian Gerlach, Kristian Breili   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN, NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2020-2021   Preferential right:  M-GEOM

Course Title: GMGD320 Satellite Geodesy - Analysis Course contents:  Apply theory from geodetic courses on 200-level to acquire insight into models used in scientific GNSS-software.  Learning outcome:  Be able to evaluate different software for processing of GNSS-observations.Be able to carry out processing and quality control of GNSS-observations. Course responsible:  Ola Øvstedal   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  Autumn semester   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2018-2019   Preferential right:  M-GEOM

Course Title: GMGI102 Geographical Information Systems, Basics Course contents:  The theoretical foundation of geographical information. Representation of geographical information on a computer. Data capture. Principles of presenting geographical information. Geographical analysis. Data exchange and standardisation. GIS software and equipment. Geographical databases.  Learning outcome:  After completing the course, students should have good knowledge of the theoretical foundation for geographical information systems (GIS) and should be capable of using such tools for collecting, storing, processing, performing simple analyses on and presenting geo-referenced information. Course responsible:  Håvard Wallin Aagesen   Teachers:  Gunnar Anton Tenge   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2008-2009

Course Title: GMGI210 Geographical Analysis and Modelling Course contents:  Spatial statistics, spatial autocorrelation, point pattern analysis. Deterministic and geostatistical interpolation methods. Overlay analysis and combinatorial methods. Suitability and conflict analysis.  Learning outcome:  Be familiar with basic methods in geographical statistics and be aware of the possibilities and limitations that these methods have. Be familiar with common methods of geographical analysis, interpolation of geographical data and the most common methods for using GIS in suitability analysis. Be able to select methods for conducting basic analysis of geo-referenced data. Course responsible:  Seyed Hossein Chavoshi   Teachers:  Geir Harald Grøtting Strand, Gunnar Anton Tenge   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2007-2008

Course Title: GMGI300 Geographical Database Systems Course contents:  Modelling of geographical information. Spatial data structures. Geographical database systems. Standards for modelling, storing and transferring geographical information. Database solutions for GIS. Distributes systems. Implementation of geographical information services.  Learning outcome:  After completing the course, the student should be capable of building models for geographical information, evaluating different solutions for geographical database handling and implementing storage and services for geographical information in centralised and distributed systems. Course responsible:  Seyed Hossein Chavoshi   Teachers:  Seyed Hossein Chavoshi   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Yearly   First time:  Study year 2003-2004

Course Title: GMGI350 Digital Cartography Course contents:  Introduction, cartographical communication, basic cartographical methods, information theory, visualization of geographic information in digital media, animations, selected topics on spatial data structures, network algorithms, topological relations, modelling of geographical information with sharp and fussy sets, representation and visualisation of digital terrain models, cartographical generalisation.  Learning outcome:  The students shall acquire: - The competence needed to decide whether a cartographical representation conveys the information in the data material it is based on in a suitable way, considering its use and the possible user groups. - The competence needed to decide whether digital terrain models are implemented in a computer in an effective way. - The competence needed to decide whether geographical information systems contain sufficiently advanced algorithms for cartographical generalisation and communication when viewed in connection with the relevant applications of the information system. The students shall understand the principles for cartographical communication, visualisation and design, mathematical modelling of terrain surfaces, representation of maps in a computer. The candidate shall be able to evaluate suitable visualization techniques for different digitale media. In addition, the candidate is to understand the mathematical basis for modelling and visualising geographical information with fussy transitions. The student is to master the normal methods for cartographical representation of geographical information such as thematic maps and relief maps . In addition, the student should be able to describe algorithms for the establishment, visualisation and generalisation of digital terrain models at a pseudocode level. The student should be able to design and describe algorithms for cartographical representation at a pseudocode level. Visualisation of geographical information means the perspectives that reality is seen from. This is where the ethical sides of the subject become apparent. Course responsible:  Terje Midtbø   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2018-2019

Course Title: GMGM200 Geomatics and Society Course contents:  Norwegian map policies. Norwegian and international geomatics infrastructures (positioning, geodata, standardisation). The organisation of Norwegian geomatics and geodata activities. Bidding procedures, contractual procedures and projects. Management of geodata.  Learning outcome:  Good knowledge about the need for - and the organisation of geomatics activities and geographical information handling on the national level and within the organisiation. Have insight into technological as well as professional organisation/leadership challenges, so that these are expressed in connection with the introduction of geographical information processing in an organisation structure. Be familiar with the main points of Norwegian geodata policies. Course responsible:  Geir Harald Grøtting Strand, Ivar Maalen-Johansen   Teachers:  Ivar Maalen-Johansen, Geir Harald Grøtting Strand   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2010-2011

Course Title: GMLM102 Geodetic Surveying Basics Course contents:  Introduction to methods for modern data collection in geomatics.In a definition by FIG, the land surveyor has the academic qualifications and technical expertise to conduct one or more of the following activities: (1) to determine, measure and represent land, three-dimensional objects, point-fields and trajectories, (2) to assemble and interpret land and geographically related information, (3) to use this information for the planning and effecient administration of the land, the sea, and any structures thereon, and (4) to conduct research into and development of the above activities.This combination of skills allows the land surveyor not only to collect and analyze data affected by climate change, but also to interpret complex interactions between climate change and sustainable infrastructure and affect planning and administration processes. The land surveyor thus contributes to local monitoring of the impact of climate change on existing infrastructure (e.g., landslides, ground stability, change in groundwater level, deformations and vibrations, 3D position changes) as well as sustainable adaptation of future infrastructure projects to climate change.  Learning outcome:  To give an introduction to modern geodetic surveying. The students should learn the basic principles and methods. In addition, the students should be able to use standard instruments and software. Course responsible:  Vegard Ophaug   Teachers:  Ola Øvstedal, Jon Glenn Omholt Gjevestad, Ivar Maalen-Johansen   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2017-2018   Preferential right:  Ranking:students who have the course as mandatory in their study planstudents on the following study programmes: M-GEOM and B-GEOMstudents with most ECTS creditsIt there are not enough slots in group one the students will be ranked by their ECTS credits.Students taking the course for the first time have lab priority.

Course Title: GMLM210 Applied Geomatics Course contents:  Field course: Planning, reconnaissance and geodetic measurements. Verification of observations in the field. Lab: Groupwise calculations based on the results from the field exercises: outlier detection, testing existing networks and reliability analysis. Relations with national standards.  Learning outcome:  Master the planning, field work and analysis of geodetic measurements. There will be great emphasis on quality assurance and connections to relevant standards. Course responsible:  Jon Glenn Omholt Gjevestad   Teachers:  Ola Øvstedal   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  30 students   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the August block. This course has teaching/evaluation in the August block and the Autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2018-2019   Preferential right:  Ranking:1.            students who have the course as mandatory in their study plan2.            students on the following study programmes: M-GEOM and B-GEOM3.            students with most ECTS creditsIt there are not enough slots in group one the students will be ranked by their ECTS credits.Students taking the course for the first time have priority.

Course Title: GMPE240 Parameter Estimation Course contents:  Optimal estimation of parameters (e.g. coordinates). Methods to detect outliers in observations. Quantification of integrity in the form of computed numbers for reliability. Introduction to sequential methods and Kalman filtering.  Learning outcome:  Master parameter estimation and propagation of errors. Have knowledge of and ability to carry out outlier detection and reliability analyses, sequential adjustment and Kalman filtering. Have knowledge of robust estimation, conditional adjustment and parameter adjustment with conditions. Course responsible:  Ola Øvstedal   Teachers:  Jon Glenn Omholt Gjevestad   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2018-2019

Course Title: GMPE340 Kalman Filter and Sensor Fusion Course contents:  Introduction to stochastic processes and applied Kalman filtering with focus on positioning, navigation and timing applications (PNT).  Learning outcome:  Students are to understand the basic filter derivation applied to dynamic systems. This is followed by various approaches to the basic theory such as: information filter, particle filter, Bayesian estimation, relationship to least squares (LSQ) and other estimators, smoothing and methods for dealing with non-linearities. Course responsible:  Jon Glenn Omholt Gjevestad   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN, NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course has teaching/evaluation in autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2020-2021

Course Title: IMRT100 Introductory Project Course contents:  IMRT100 is the introductory course for studies towards a Master in Technology, Bachelor in Geomatics and Bachelor in Energy and Environmental Physics.Students will be inspired and motivated by a taste of their studies. Students undertake a project specific to their field of study in groups, aquainting themselves with problems and methods typical for their field of studies.In addition, students will be be introduced to study techniques, to the faculty and NMBU, as well as refreshing their mathematics skills.  Learning outcome:  The students shall obtain knowledge about the role mathematical sciences and technology plays for the department's different subject areas, to the benefit for the student's own further studies. The students shall obtain knowledge about good study practice, rules concerning plagiarizm and report writing. The students shall develop skills regarding project work and writing of reports through, within own subject area, to complete a subject-oriented project in a group. Course responsible:  Arnstein Moe, Ivar Maalen-Johansen   Teachers:  Henrik Folke Holmberg, Tor Kristian Stevik, Arve Heistad, Egil Stemsrud, Ivar Maalen-Johansen   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the august block. This course has teaching and evaluation during the august block.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2003-2004

Course Title: IND200 Practical Project Management Course contents:  The subject is a modern project management course based on the national project governance regime for quality assurance of public investment projects, and the platforms of PMI and IPMA for Project management and governance.1. Project development in the early phase. The main topics:The conceptual framework, project phase models. the value perspectiveProject concept development, need assessment, project objectives and strategies, alternative analysis and evaluation criteria. Uncertainty management during project concept development and choice of concept.Analysis technique: Monte Carlo-simuleringAnalysis tools: Crystal ball, Fullmonte og Anslag 4.0.The focus is on developing and section of the right project concepts, and delivering high value projects.2. Projects in the planning and implementation phases. The main topics:Concepts, project management parametersProject planning, project organizing, project work breakdown structure (WBS), cost estimating, scheduling, procurement and contract strategy, communication and uncertainty management.Project progress follow up, status reporting, forecasting time and cost, and project valuePractical project examples are part of the lecture series.  Learning outcome:  The course provides basic skill for managing and governing of  projects at the different phases of the project development process. The candidate will get knowledge on the methods and procedures that are used to evaluate alternative project concepts. Project examples will be presented to give students better understanding of the theory that are discussed during the lecture hours.                                                         Course responsible:  Asmamaw Tadege Shiferaw   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2012-2013

Course Title: IND210 Industrial Management Course contents:  The course content is: Operation and efficiency, lean production system / stability, basic principles for managing production, flow and layout, standardization / Just in Time, quality / involvement / planning, ERP / MRP, OEE, lean as operational management tool, digitization and lean. There will also be an introduction to six sigma.  Learning outcome:  Students will have a basic understanding and knowledge of the operation of the following processes; industry, building and construction, hospitals and fish farming. When the course is completed, the students should be able to manage operational operations, analyze, plan and optimize such processes. Students knowledge of specific tools will be emphasized. A main goal is for the students to gain a practical insight into the topics that are reviewed in the course. Course responsible:  Tor Kristian Stevik   Teachers:  Jesper Frausig, Jan Ola Strandhagen   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2017-2018

Course Title: IND220 Innovation Enterprise Course contents:  The students will develop a business idea through a student company that is established in connection with the course. A business plan should be written, as well as a report describing the company's processes. Selected companies have the opportunity to participate in various competitions. In the course, recommended literature is provided. Acquisition of material takes place through lectures, experience-based work in small groups / supervision, self-study and recommended literature.  Learning outcome:  .The students will, after completing the course, know and be able to use process tools for idea generation, business modeling and collaboration / team development, as well as carry out expectations clarifications on the market, partners, funding sources. Knowledge of the implementation of market analyses, and the practical marketing / sale of a product or service is also important. Students will be familiar with laws and regulations for the start, operation and liquidation of a company, and be able to prepare budgets and exercise good financial management. Course responsible:  Tor Kristian Stevik   Teachers:  Jesper Frausig   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  80   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel, Spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2013-2014   Preferential right:  This course has limited availability. First come, first served.

Course Title: IND230 Quality Management Course contents:  The quality control term, functional security and reliability, durability calculations, robust design and process control. The 7 quality tools, control diagrams, capability, cooperation and total quality management.  Learning outcome:  Having passed the course, students will have key knowledge of the main principles of quality control and assurance. They will also be able to use important methods and procedures for quality control and quality improvement. Course responsible:  Jesper Frausig   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in January block. This course has teaching/evaluation in January block, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2013-2014

Course Title: IND240 Uncertainty Management in Projects Course contents:  Themes:  Challenges / deficiencies  in deterministic project mnanagementUncertainty dimension in projectsDecisions under uncertaintyQuantitative uncertainty analysis; costs, total economy, progressQualitative uncertainty analyzesMulti criteria decision analysis (MCDA)Analysis Techniques - Monte Carlo simulationAnalysis tools - examplesOperational, proactive management of project uncertaintyValue as a governing parameter  The course will have a strong foundation with examples from real projects.  Learning outcome:  The course will provide students basic knowledge on the analysis and management of the uncertainty dimension of  projects:Investment costsTotal economyProgress plans (schedule)Value creation / usefulnessThe use of recognized tools and review of actual project examples in the classroom provide students  the required skill to cope with the actual challenges of project management and governance. Course responsible:  Asmamaw Tadege Shiferaw   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  Spring semester   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2015-2016

Course Title: IND250 Production logistics and distribution Course contents:  The course deals with production logistics and distribution. Distribution includes transport, warehousing, and goods delivery. The course primarily covers both the structural and management parts of the field and both methods and principles and a descriptive description of systems and equipment for logistics and distribution. Learning activities are threefold; a lecture part, an exercise part, and a computer modeling-based project assignment. The lectures provide insight into principles and methods. The exercises are based on industrial cases, and the project assignments focus on one case using real data.Production logistics contains topics such as management principles and management models, digital management systems, factory layout, and material handling. Distribution models, warehouse models and inventory management, as well as an overview of various delivery models, including online business models.The course covers especially modern and future solutions such as real-time decision support, internet-based operating models, sensors and monitoring for steering, and autonomous load carriers and vehicles.  Learning outcome:  - Possess basic knowledge of production logistics and distribution in a modern society- Have an understanding of and be able to apply relevant models, methods, and analysis techniques- Have insight and understanding of the use of digital technology, autonomous systems, and intelligent decision support- Ability to be able to apply acquired knowledge to develop comprehensive solutions in production logistics   and distribution- Ability to transform theories into practical applications based on well-founded choices of relevant alternative solutions.- Evaluate analysis tools, methods, technical models, and solutions independently and critically.- Ability to assess how technological development provides new opportunities in operations and business development- Understand the role of logistics in a holistic societal perspective with a focus on sustainability and opportunities in digitalization.- Be able to convey and communicate logistics issues and solutions Course responsible:  Jan Ola Strandhagen   Teachers:  Jesper Frausig, Tor Kristian Stevik   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  Autumn semester   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2021-2022

Course Title: IND300 Experts in Teamwork Course contents:  The course is primarily a groupproject  with supervision, where students will work with a multidisciplinary issue. Relevant issues in the course is taken from society and working life. In addition to the workshops there will be 3-4 lectures on the topic of cooperative skills. An important part of the groupwork is to optain an awareness in relation to orientation, assessment, overall, and cooperation phase, where emphases will be put on communication, problem solving, decision making and conflict management. Students will through this groupwork get training in listening, asking questions, talking about unpleasant topics, personal conflicts, professional disagreement, giving and receiving feedback, and training to improve response patterns. Collaboration competence will be developed through joint reflection on the group cooperation, and by giving each other constructive feedback.  Learning outcome:  Students will after completing the course have knowledge about communication and cooperation forms that enables them to work with interdisciplinary issues. This means that they can convey their own competence in interdisciplinary cooperation, as well as applying their own and others' expertise to find the best overall solution for the project. Furthermore, they should be able to analyze and reflect on their own and others' role and contribution in the project and apply the basic concepts and methods from relevant disciplines. Course responsible:  Tor Kristian Stevik   Teachers:  Jesper Frausig   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  T This course has teaching/evaluation in January block, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2013-2014   Preferential right:  Ranking:1.            Students who have the course as mandatory in their study plan2.            Students on the following study programmes: M-IØ3.            Students with most ECTS creditsIt there are not enough slots in group one the students will be ranked by their ECTS credits.

Course Title: IND310 Operational optimization Course contents:  The approach of the course is twofold. Part one is a preparatory course for a masters, where methodology and master's writing are taught, as well as a preliminary project for the master's thesis. Part two includes production and operational optimization using computer science. Optimization deals amongst other things with design and develop. of systems, method overview, process analysis, conceptual analysis and management models, economic models and mathematical models, simulation, and improvement methodology  Learning outcome:  Students must have a good understanding of methods, as well as an understanding of how to write a master's thesis.Students must have a basic understanding and knowledge of operations. Once the course has been completed, students should be able to manage operations, analyze, plan and optimize processes. Emphasis will be placed on giving students knowledge about specific tools. It is a clear goal of the students to gain a practical insight into the topics covered in the course.After completing the courseOur focus is the approach to digital decision support. IND310 will look at different contexts from the 5 sectors from the Industry Classification Benchmark (ICB): Health, Financial, Industry, Energy, Aqualtur  In order to make good decisions when working with data, we will first learn the approach to digital operations management through CRISP-DM methodology: 1. Business understanding, 2. Data understanding 3. Data preparation 4. Modeling Course responsible:  Tor Kristian Stevik   Teachers:  Jan Ola Strandhagen, Jesper Frausig, Habib Ullah   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN, NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallell.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2021-2022

Course Title: IND400 Project Management for PhD candidates, veterinarian research students and Residents Course contents:  Subjects:About projects: Concepts, structure and definitions.What characterizes research projects?Pitfalls and benefits.Formulating project goals and objectives at different stages and levels of the research project.Organizing research projects - Roles, stakeholders, responsibilities.Scheduling: How to free resources and identifying time thieves within the project.Uncertainty: Risks and opportunities in the project.The Project Manager's responsibilities and tasks.Cooperation and team building in research projects.Status reporting and project controlProject closing and benefit realizationBuilding a Data Management Plan (DMP)Learning activities:Under supervision by the course instructor, the student prepares plans for his/her own resarch project.Two compulsory submissions, of which one is a home examination  Learning outcome:  KnowledgeGood knowledge of how to plan, organise, manage and lead research projectsAble to develop teams, strategic 'anchoring' and understanding of the project plan among the project partners SkillsIs able to prepare the necessary documents needed to plan his/her own research project.General competenceKnows relevant project methods and tools. By teaching and exercises, the student is trained in preparation, implementation and evaluation of research projects  Course responsible:  Asmamaw Tadege Shiferaw   Teachers:  Arnstein Moe   ECTS credits:  2   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN, NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  24   Teaching exam periods:  This course is taught and have exam in spring parallel and autumn paralell.   Course frequency:  Twice per year.   First time:  Study year 2021-2022   Preferential right:  PhD candidates enrolled into a PhD programme at NMBU, Diplomat/European Veterinary specialists and research candidates in veterinary medicine.

Course Title: INF100 Principles of Information Processing Course contents:  Introduction to elementary programming for problem solving. We will use computers and modern software for learning elementary programming by considering numerical solutions of mathematical problems associated with the courses MATH100 and MATH111.  Learning outcome:  Elementary programming skills and insight into some fundamental principles for problem solving by programming and operation of computers including some numerical methods introduced in elementary mathematics courses. Course responsible:  Ulf Geir Indahl   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  350   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the autumn parallel. This course has teaching and evaluation in the autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2003-2004

Course Title: INF120 Programming and Data Processing Course contents:  The course will introduce you to programming and data processing with a focus on procedural programming in a high-level programming language. Specific topics are:simple datatypes (numeric, boolean, character)basic composite datatypes (strings, arrays, lists, dictionaries)basic aspects of classescontrol structures (branching, loops, list comprehensions)functions and parameter exchangerecursive functionsreading from/writing to filesdata analysis and -visualizationbasic error handlingstructuring of problem solutionslocalization of errors in programsediting, debuggingThe course is based on the Python programming language.  Learning outcome:  After completing the course, you will know how to:independently develop programs of limited complexityread and understand programs at an equivalent level of complexityanalyse simple problems and implement algorithms to solve themdevelop programs to analyze and visualize datalocalise errors in programsuse basic programming toolsYou will have acquired a basic knowledge of the higher level programming language used in the course. You will be able to evaluate the suitability of programs of limited complexity. Course responsible:  Oliver Tomic, Oliver Tomic   Teachers:  Thomas Graff   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the autum parallel. This course has teaching and evaluation during the autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2009-2010

Course Title: INF200 Advanced Programming Course contents:  Programming tools: development environment and version controlObject-oriented programming in PythonScientific computing in PythonTest-based programming and testsuites, documentation toolsDebuggingProfiling and optimizationUser interfacesProgramming project  Learning outcome:  After completing the course, you will be able to:develop programs based on procedural and object-oriented programmingread and understand programs at an equivalent level of complexityanalyse tasks and implement algorithms to solve themuse functionality delivered by standard librarieslocalize errors in programsoptimize program performanceuse programming tools such as debuggers, profilers, testsuites, documentation tools and version control.You will be able to evaluate the applicability of more complex programs and able to assert their quality, and will have developed an insight into the programmer's responsibility for the correct and reliable functioning of his or her own programs, their quality and documentation. Course responsible:  Hans Ekkehard Plesser   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  180   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the autumn parallel. This course has teaching during the autumn parallel and teaching and evaluation either during the January block or during the June block.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2010-2011   Preferential right:  1 Data science (M-DV, M-TDV)2 Students who have the course as a mandatory course in their study plan3 Students from REALTEKStudents who have passed the course earlier will get last priority.

Course Title: INF205 Resource-efficient programming Course contents:  This course introduces students with considerable programming experience in high-level programming languages such as Python to programming in a compiled programming language with explicit memory management, with a focus on efficient use of memory and compute resources. Specific topics are:Modern C++ syntax and semanticsCompiling and building projectsPointers, memory allocation and deallocationWorking with the C++ Standard LibraryGeneric programming with templatesImplementing containers from first principlesMessage passing and interprocess communicationRequirements of embedded programmingOptimization  Learning outcome:  After completing the course you will be able toimplement solutions in modern C++manage memory correctly in larger projectsmake use of capabilities provided by the C++ Standard Library and third-party librariesimplement data types from "first principles"write code suitable for embedded systemscreate interfaces allowing your code to interact with other software Course responsible:  Martin Thomas Horsch   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  The course starts in the autumn parallel. The course has evaluation in the autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2022-2023

Course Title: INF221 Computer Science for Data Scientists Course contents:  This subject provides knowledge about mathematical foundations for the analysis of algorithms, central algorithms, and data structures, methods for the analysis of performance, and the proof of correctness of such algorithms and data structures, as well as about key problem-solving strategies. The subject furthermore provides an introduction to the applications of the proposed topics in data science, e.g., reinforcement learning, decision trees, and software engineering.  Learning outcome:  Upon completion of this course, you will be able to analyze the performance and correctness of algorithms and data structures, evaluate which data structures are suitable for given purposes, and knowledge essential problem-solving strategies. You can also apply these techniques within data science. Course responsible:  Fadi al Machot   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the spring parallel. This course has teaching and exam during the spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2022-2023

Course Title: INF230 Data Processing and Analysis Course contents:  The course is under constant development due to the nature of technology and its development. The basic topics of the course are:Introduction to databases.Raw data and data processing.Analysis and methodsQuery and analysis of dataDatalogging from external devices.Data and security.See the course web pages for updated information.  Learning outcome:  Be familiar with database handling systems and the theoretical foundation.Master methods and techniques used for structuring raw data.Be able to model and analyse data located in databases Be able to program solutions for processlng and analysis of raw dataBe able to use existing analysis software and knowhow the workflowBe able to use data mining principlesBe familiar with IOT (Internet Of Things)Be familiar with datalogging and on-line visualisation Course responsible:  Habib Ullah   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN, NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the spring parallel. This course has teaching and evaluation during the spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2017-2018

Course Title: INF250 Image Analysis Course contents:  Image analysis is an important subject field in the academic world and in industry. The course gives an introduction to modern techniques that help the student to a comprehensive understanding of how to measure and analyse phenomena in nature. Great emphasis in this course is placed on gaining knowledge and understanding through practical exercises. It is important for the student"s further studies to see the applicability of image analysis in many different subject fields. The student will learn how to program simple applications in imaging. The student shall acquire the knowledge needed to develop analysis methods by means of various types of program tools. Another important point is that the student should be able to participate in evaluations concerning the selection of suitable equipment for applications. Updated information is given at the course website.  Learning outcome:  Gain a theoretical and practical understanding of image processing, image analysis and pattern recognition.Be able to design and conduct analysis methods based on digital image representation.Gain a basic understanding of the practical use of signal processing as applied to digital images.Produce and distribute open source image applications. Course responsible:  Ingunn Burud   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN, NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the autumn parallel. This course has teaching and evaluation in the autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2004-2005

Course Title: M30-AQFOOD Master's Thesis Course contents:  The Master thesis consists of an independent research project during the last semester of the study.The Master thesis can be written as a monograph or scientific article. Students receive guidance from an appointed supervisor and co-supervisor (s). The supervision will ensure that students find literature, and get practical advice on data collection and laboratory work, as well as ethical guidelines. The exam is in the form of a student presentation and a scientific discussion about the masterproject.  Learning outcome:  After completing the thesis, the student will be able to:- Conduct an independent research project on a selected topic.- Use relevant theories and research methods as a tool in research.- Analyze and draw conclusions from an independent research project.- Convey information based on the independent research project in writing and orally.- Read, understand and make use of research litterature.- Adhere to ethics guidelines. Course responsible:  Odd Ivar Lekang   ECTS credits:  30   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN, NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  Spring and Autumn   Course frequency:  Every semester   First time:  Study year 2014-2015

Course Title: M30-BA Master's Thesis Course contents:  The Master thesis consists of an independent research project during the last semester of the study.The Master thesis can be written as a monograph or scientific article. Students receive guidance from an appointed supervisor and co-supervisor (s). The supervision will ensure that students find literature, and get practical advice on data collection and laboratory work, as well as ethical guidelines. The exam is in the form of a student presentation and a scientific discussion about the masterproject.  Learning outcome:  After completing the thesis, the student will be able to:- Conduct an independent research project on a selected topic.- Use relevant theories and research methods as a tool in research.- Analyze and draw conclusions from an independent research project.- Convey information based on the independent research project in writing and orally.- Read, understand and make use of research litterature.- Adhere to ethics guidelines. Course responsible:  Leif Daniel Houck   ECTS credits:  30   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching exam periods:  Autumn and spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Every semester.   First time:  Study year 2014-2015

Course Title: M30-DV Master's Thesis Course contents:  The Master thesis consists of an independent research project during the last semester of the study.The Master thesis can be written as a monograph or scientific article. Students receive guidance from an appointed supervisor and co-supervisor (s). The supervision will ensure that students find literature, and get practical advice on data collection and laboratory work, as well as ethical guidelines. The exam is in the form of a student presentation and a scientific discussion about the masterproject.  Learning outcome:  After completing the thesis, the student will be able to:- Conduct an independent research project on a selected topic.- Use relevant theories and research methods as a tool in research.- Analyze and draw conclusions from an independent research project.- Convey information based on the independent research project in writing and orally.- Read, understand and make use of research litterature.- Adhere to ethics guidelines. Course responsible:  Hans Ekkehard Plesser   ECTS credits:  30   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching exam periods:  Autumn and spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Every semester.   First time:  Study year 2018-2019

Course Title: M30-GEOM Master's Thesis Course contents:  The Master thesis consists of an independent research project during the last semester of the study.The Master thesis can be written as a monograph or scientific article. Students receive guidance from an appointed supervisor and co-supervisor (s). The supervision will ensure that students find literature, and get practical advice on data collection and laboratory work, as well as ethical guidelines. The exam is in the form of a student presentation and a scientific discussion about the masterproject.  Learning outcome:  After completing the thesis, the student will be able to:- Conduct an independent research project on a selected topic.- Use relevant theories and research methods as a tool in research.- Analyze and draw conclusions from an independent research project.- Convey information based on the independent research project in writing and orally.- Read, understand and make use of research litterature.- Adhere to ethics guidelines. Course responsible:  Ivar Maalen-Johansen   ECTS credits:  30   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching exam periods:  Autumn and spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Every semester.   First time:  Study year 2014-2015

Course Title: M30-IØ Master's Thesis Course contents:  The Master thesis consists of an independent research project during the last semester of the study.The Master thesis can be written as a monograph or scientific article. Students receive guidance from an appointed supervisor and co-supervisor (s). The supervision will ensure that students find literature, and get practical advice on data collection and laboratory work, as well as ethical guidelines. The exam is in the form of a student presentation and a scientific discussion about the masterproject.  Learning outcome:  After completing the thesis, the student will be able to:- Conduct an independent research project on a selected topic.- Use relevant theories and research methods as a tool in research.- Analyze and draw conclusions from an independent research project.- Convey information based on the independent research project in writing and orally.- Read, understand and make use of research litterature.- Adhere to ethics guidelines. Course responsible:  Odd Ivar Lekang   ECTS credits:  30   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching exam periods:  Autumn and spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Every semester.   First time:  Study year 2014-2015

Course Title: M30-LUN Master's Thesis Course contents:  The master's thesis consists of an independent research project that is carried out in the last semester of the study and can be submitted as a monograph or scientific article. The student receives supervision in the research process from an appointed supervisor and (possible) co-supervisors. The supervision supports the independent process with advice on literature, methodology, data collection and possible laboratory work, and ensures research ethics guidelines are followed. The master's thesis is vocationally oriented within the educational sciences. We offer master's theses within all didactic subjects of science education.  Learning outcome:  After completing the master's thesis, the student should be able to:- Carry out independent research and development work based on a research question.- Use relevant theories and research methods as tools in the research work.- Analyze and draw conclusions from an independently conducted research project.- Communicate the project's research and experience-based knowledge (based on an independent research project) both in writing and orally.- Read, understand and use research literature.- Follow research ethics guidelines.More specifically, the student should be able to:• develop a problem statement/research question that is justified on the basis of relevance to the field and/or practice.• delimit the task sufficiently so that it is feasible.• apply recognized research approaches and methods that are relevant and reasoned• evaluate the research work with regard to research ethics, including any necessary approvals from NSD• discuss opportunities and challenges with method choices• apply subject / vocational didactic theory and research literature that is relevant to the chosen research question• work independently and possibly participate in relevant research groups• write the master's thesis according to academic style and requirements, with a clear connection between the different parts of the thesis.• analyze and discuss results and findings and justify how they have emerged• answer and discuss issues/research questions with necessary reservations and implications. Course responsible:  Edvin Østergaard   ECTS credits:  30   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching exam periods:  Autumn and spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Every semester.   First time:  Study year 2014-2015

Course Title: M30-MATH Master's Thesis Course contents:  The Master thesis consists of an independent research project during the last semester of the study.The Master thesis can be written as a monograph or scientific article. Students receive guidance from an appointed supervisor and co-supervisor (s). The supervision will ensure that students find literature, and get practical advice on data collection and laboratory work, as well as ethical guidelines. The exam is in the form of a student presentation and a scientific discussion about the masterproject.  Learning outcome:  After completing the thesis, the student will be able to:- Conduct an independent research project on a selected topic.- Use relevant theories and research methods as a tool in research.- Analyze and draw conclusions from an independent research project.- Convey information based on the independent research project in writing and orally.- Read, understand and make use of research litterature.- Adhere to ethics guidelines. Course responsible:  Bjørn Fredrik Nielsen   ECTS credits:  30   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching exam periods:  Autumn and spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Every semester.   First time:  Study year 2021-2022

Course Title: M30-MF Master's Thesis Course contents:  The Master thesis consists of an independent research project during the last semester of the study.The Master thesis can be written as a monograph or scientific article. Students receive guidance from an appointed supervisor and co-supervisor (s). The supervision will ensure that students find literature, and get practical advice on data collection and laboratory work, as well as ethical guidelines. The exam is in the form of a student presentation and a scientific discussion about the masterproject.  Learning outcome:  After completing the thesis, the student will be able to:- Conduct an independent research project on a selected topic.- Use relevant theories and research methods as a tool in research.- Analyze and draw conclusions from an independent research project.- Convey information based on the independent research project in writing and orally.- Read, understand and make use of research litterature.- Adhere to ethics guidelines. Course responsible:  Achim Kohler   ECTS credits:  30   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching exam periods:  Autumn and spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Every semester.   First time:  Study year 2014-2015   Preferential right:  900 hours

Course Title: M30-MPP Master's Thesis Course contents:  The Master thesis consists of an independent research project during the last semester of the study.The Master thesis can be written as a monograph or scientific article. Students receive guidance from an appointed supervisor and co-supervisor (s). The supervision will ensure that students find literature, and get practical advice on data collection and laboratory work, as well as ethical guidelines. The exam is in the form of a student presentation and a scientific discussion about the masterproject.   Learning outcome:  After completing the thesis, the student will be able to:- Conduct an independent research project on a selected topic.- Use relevant theories and research methods as a tool in research.- Analyze and draw conclusions from an independent research project.- Convey information based on the independent research project in writing and orally.- Read, understand and make use of research litterature.- Adhere to ethics guidelines. Course responsible:  Odd Ivar Lekang   ECTS credits:  30   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching exam periods:  Autumn and spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Every semester.   First time:  Study year 2014-2015

Course Title: M30-VM Master's Thesis Course contents:  The Master thesis consists of an independent research project during the last semester of the study.The Master thesis can be written as a monograph or scientific article. Students receive guidance from an appointed supervisor and co-supervisor (s). The supervision will ensure that students find literature, and get practical advice on data collection and laboratory work, as well as ethical guidelines. The exam is in the form of a student presentation and a scientific discussion about the masterproject.  Learning outcome:  After completing the thesis, the student will be able to:- Conduct an independent research project on a selected topic.- Use relevant theories and research methods as a tool in research.- Analyze and draw conclusions from an independent research project.- Convey information based on the independent research project in writing and orally.- Read, understand and make use of research litterature.- Adhere to ethics guidelines. Course responsible:  Arve Heistad   ECTS credits:  30   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching exam periods:  Autumn and spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Every semester.   First time:  Study year 2014-2015

Course Title: M60-BA Master's Thesis Course contents:  The Master thesis consists of an independent research project during the last semester of the study. Students receive guidance from an appointed supervisor and co-supervisor (s). The supervision will ensure that students find literature, and get practical advice on data collection and laboratory work, as well as ethical guidelines. The exam is in the form of a student presentation and a scientific discussion about the master project.  Learning outcome:  After completing the thesis, the student will be able to:- Conduct and implement an independent research project on a selected topic.- Use relevant theories and research methods as a tool in research.- Analyze and draw conclusions from an independent research project.- Convey information based on the independent research project in writing and orally.- Read, understand and make use of research litterature.- Adhere to ethics guidelines. Course responsible:  Leif Daniel Houck   ECTS credits:  60   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching exam periods:  Spring and Autumn   Course frequency:  Every year   First time:  Study year 2014-2015

Course Title: M60-GEOM Master's Thesis Course contents:  The Master thesis consists of an independent research project during the last semester of the study. Students receive guidance from an appointed supervisor and co-supervisor (s). The supervision will ensure that students find literature, and get practical advice on data collection and laboratory work, as well as ethical guidelines. The exam is in the form of a student presentation and a scientific discussion about the master project.  Learning outcome:  After completing the thesis, the student will be able to:- Conduct and implement an independent research project on a selected topic.- Use relevant theories and research methods as a tool in research.- Analyze and draw conclusions from an independent research project.- Convey information based on the independent research project in writing and orally.- Read, understand and make use of research litterature.- Adhere to ethics guidelines. Course responsible:  Ivar Maalen-Johansen   ECTS credits:  60   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching exam periods:  Spring and Autumn   Course frequency:  Every year   First time:  Study year 2014-2015

Course Title: M60-IØ Master's Thesis Course contents:  The Master thesis consists of an independent research project during the last semester of the study. Students receive guidance from an appointed supervisor and co-supervisor (s). The supervision will ensure that students find literature, and get practical advice on data collection and laboratory work, as well as ethical guidelines. The exam is in the form of a student presentation and a scientific discussion about the masterproject.  Learning outcome:  After completing the thesis, the student will be able to:- Conduct and implement an independent research project on a selected topic.- Use relevant theories and research methods as a tool in research.- Analyze and draw conclusions from an independent research project.- Convey information based on the independent research project in writing and orally.- Read, understand and make use of research litterature.- Adhere to ethics guidelines. Course responsible:  Tor Kristian Stevik   ECTS credits:  60   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching exam periods:  Autumn and Spring   Course frequency:  Every year   First time:  Study year 2014-2015

Course Title: M60-LUN Master's Thesis Course contents:  .  Learning outcome:  . Course responsible:  Edvin Østergaard, Hans Erik Lefdal   ECTS credits:  60   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  Spring and Autumn parallel   Course frequency:  Annual   First time:  Study year 2014-2015

Course Title: M60-MATH Master's Thesis Course contents:  The Master thesis consists of an independent research project during the last semester of the study.The Master thesis can be written as a monograph or scientific article. Students receive guidance from an appointed supervisor and co-supervisor (s). The supervision will ensure that students find literature, and get practical advice on data collection and laboratory work, as well as ethical guidelines. The exam is in the form of a student presentation and a scientific discussion about the masterproject.  Learning outcome:  After completing the thesis, the student will be able to:- Conduct an independent research project on a selected topic.- Use relevant theories and research methods as a tool in research.- Analyze and draw conclusions from an independent research project.- Convey information based on the independent research project in writing and orally.- Read, understand and make use of research litterature.- Adhere to ethics guidelines. Course responsible:  Bjørn Fredrik Nielsen   ECTS credits:  60   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching exam periods:  Autumn and spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Every semester.   First time:  Study year 2021-2022

Course Title: M60-MF Master's Thesis Course contents:  The Master thesis consists of an independent research project during the last semester of the study. Students receive guidance from an appointed supervisor and co-supervisor (s). The supervision will ensure that students find literature, and get practical advice on data collection and laboratory work, as well as ethical guidelines. The exam is in the form of a student presentation and a scientific discussion about the master project.  Learning outcome:  After completing the thesis, the student will be able to:- Conduct and implement an independent research project on a selected topic.- Use relevant theories and research methods as a tool in research.- Analyze and draw conclusions from an independent research project.- Convey information based on the independent research project in writing and orally.- Read, understand and make use of research litterature.- Adhere to ethics guidelines. Course responsible:  Achim Kohler   ECTS credits:  60   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching exam periods:  Spring and Autumn   Course frequency:  Every year   First time:  Study year 2014-2015

Course Title: M60-MPP Master's Thesis Course contents:  The Master thesis consists of an independent research project during the last semester of the study. Students receive guidance from an appointed supervisor and co-supervisor (s). The supervision will ensure that students find literature, and get practical advice on data collection and laboratory work, as well as ethical guidelines. The exam is in the form of a student presentation and a scientific discussion about the masterproject.  Learning outcome:  After completing the thesis, the student will be able to:- Conduct and implement an independent research project on a selected topic.- Use relevant theories and research methods as a tool in research.- Analyze and draw conclusions from an independent research project.- Convey information based on the independent research project in writing and orally.- Read, understand and make use of research litterature.- Adhere to ethics guidelines. Course responsible:  Odd Ivar Lekang   ECTS credits:  60   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching exam periods:  Spring and Autumn   Course frequency:  Every year   First time:  Study year 2014-2015

Course Title: M60-VM Master's ThesisECTS credits:  60   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   First time:  Study year 2014-2015

Course Title: MATH007 Preparatory course in mathematics for MATH100 and MATH111 Course contents:  .  Learning outcome:  . Course responsible:  Geir Bogfjellmo   ECTS credits:  0   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  .   Course frequency:  .   First time:  Study year 2016-2017

Course Title: MATH100 Introductory Mathematics Course contents:  The course covers a selection of mathematical methods, (continuous) functions in one or two variables and vectors in two or three dimensions that describe important phenomena in science and economy.Computation of slope and extremal points using differentiation. Optimization of functions of one or two variables.Computation of areas and infinite summation (series) are connected to the concept of integration.Examples of solving simple, ordinary differential equations.  Learning outcome:  KnowledgeWhen the course is completed, the student will have learned basic concepts, methods and techniques related to the course contents.SkillsThe student will gain computational skills, that, along with the theory, enables them to use standard methods to study a selection of functions of one or two variables, series, vectors and differential equations.General competenceThe student will be able to connect the theory to relevant practical problems and apply it. Course responsible:  Susanne Solem   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2005-2006

Course Title: MATH111 Calculus 1 Course contents:  Basic algebra, elementary functions (linear and quadratic functions, polynomials, trigonometric functions, exponential functions and logarithmic functions). Inverse functions, parametrical curves. Functions of one variable: Limits and continuity, differentiation and derivative, applications of the derivative, analysis of functions and graphs, linearisation, optimisation. The Riemann integral and basic integration technique. Taylor polynomials and polynomial approximations. Vectors in the plane and the space. Numerical algorithms for finding roots, numerical integration and solution of simple differential equations.  Learning outcome:  Students are to:acquire the basic ideas and theorems in the theorymaster the standard methods for analysing and operating with functions with one variablebe able to use this knowledge and skills to solve simple applied problems. Course responsible:  Ole Løseth Elvetun   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2003-2004

Course Title: MATH112 Calculus 2 Course contents:  Applications of the definite integral, areas, length of curves. Polar coordinates. Vector-valued functions, parameterised curves. Multivariable functions, linearization, gradient and directional derivatives, optimization, Lagrange-multipliers. Multiple integrals. integration techniques and applications of integrals. Line integrals. Surface integrals. Green's, Gauss' and Stoke's theorems. Simple programming of numerical computations of the integrals.  Learning outcome:  Students are toAcquire basic ideas and theorems of the theory.Master the standard methods for analysing and operating with scalar functions and vector functions in one or more variables.Be able to use this knowledge and these skills when solving simple applied problems. Course responsible:  Arkadi Ponossov   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in the spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2004-2005

Course Title: MATH113 Linear Algebra and Linear Differential Equations Course contents:  The course consists of two parts:Linear algebra (common teaching with MATH131): Systems of linear equations, Gauss elimination, inverse matrices, determinants, bases, complex numbers, eigenvalues, eigenvectorsLinear differential equations: First - and second order linear ordinary differential equations, selected numerical methods. Introduction to non-linear differential equations.  Learning outcome:  Students are toacquire basic ideas and theorems of the theorymaster the standard methods in linear algebra and for the solution of linear differential equationsbe able to use this knowledge and these skills when solving simple applied problems Course responsible:  Bjørn Fredrik Nielsen   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2009-2010

Course Title: MATH131 Linear Algebra Course contents:  Linear algebra (joint with MATH113): Systems of linear equations, Gauss elimination, inverse matrices, determinants, bases, eigenvalues and eigenvectors  Learning outcome:  Students are toacquire basic ideas and theorems of the theorymaster the standard methods in linear algebrabe able to use this knowledge and these skills when solving simple applied problems. Course responsible:  Bjørn Fredrik Nielsen   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2009-2010

Course Title: MATH250 Partial Differential Equations and Models Course contents:  Lectures cover the most important parts of each topic. After this, the students are given exercises on the same topics. The exercises are intended to help students practice calculation technique, understand methods and ideas as well as be able to apply the subject to technical-physical problems. Projects based on MATLAB will be an important part of the course.MATH250 deals with the following topics:Modeling. Derivation of partial differential equations like the  Laplace equation, the diffusion equation and the wave equation from fundamental principles (balance laws) as conservation of mass, charge, particle number, momentum, energyAnalytical methods. Analytical solution methods for linear partial differential equations: Separation of variables, Hilbert - space theory, Sturm - Liouville theory, Fourier series.Numercal methods and simulation. Numerical solution of partial differential equations by means of difference methods. Usage of the program package PYTHON or MATLAB.  Learning outcome:  Students are to learn the basic theory of partial differential equations. They are to become capable of using this theory for solving problems in biology, geomatics, physics and technology.After completing the course, the students should master the following topics: conservation laws, classification of partial differential equations, the wave equation, diffusion equations, the Laplace equation, separation of variable techniques, Sturm-Liouville theory, Fourier series and Fourier transform techniques, difference methods.Students are to be able to use:relevant methods and techniques with emphasis on practical applicationsthe computer programme PYTHON or MATLAB for solving and visualising problems that are part of the courseThey should also be able to make and analyse simple mathematical models. Course responsible:  Arkadi Ponossov   Teachers:  Arkadi Ponossov   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually, minimum 5 students   First time:  Study year 2004-2005

Course Title: MATH270 Complex Analysis and Transformation Methods Course contents:  The course deals with elementary theory in complex analysis and transformation methods. Students will be introduced to complex numbers and functions, Cauchy's integral theorem and formula, Taylor and Laurent series, residue calculation, and Fourier series and transformations.   Learning outcome:  After completion of the course, the student will have learnt elementary theory for analytical functions and transformation methods. The student will be able to apply this theory to relevant applied problems (in, for example, geomatics, physics, and technology). After completing the course, the students will masterComplex numbersComplex functionsCauchy's integral theorem and Cauchy's integral formulaTaylor series and Laurent seriesResidue calculationsFourier seriesFourier transformations Course responsible:  Susanne Solem   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the Spring parallel. This course has teaching and evaluation in the Spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2004-2005

Course Title: MATH280 Applied Linear Algebra Course contents:  TheoryBasic concepts and methods in applied linear algebra, including:Numerical aspects associated with solving Linear EquationsVector Spaces and Linear TransformationsDiagonalization and change of Change of Coordinate BasisInner Products, Length, Orthogonality and Inner Product SpacesOrthogonal Projections and Least-Squares ProblemsThe Gram-Schmidt process and QR-factorizationThe Singular Value DecompositionThe condition numberTikhonov regularizationApplicationsExamples of practical applications, including:Linear Regression (Principal Component Regression, Weighted Least Squares)Constrained optimizationPrincipal component analysisDynamical systems, including Markov chains  Learning outcome:  KnowledgeAfter completing the course, the student will understand important concepts in linear algebra, specifically under the points mentioned in the course content.Skills The student will be able to apply the methods from the course to analyze models and solve practical problems where these methods are relevant.General competenceThe student will be able to use computer tools to do calculations and apply methods of linear algebra. Course responsible:  Geir Bogfjellmo   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in the spring parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually.   First time:  Study year 2009-2010

Course Title: MATH285 Optimization Course contents:  The course gives an introduction to the field of optimization, where we will cover four main topics:Basic concepts ConvexityLines and hyperplanesTaylor’s theoremUnconstrained optimization Optimality conditionsSearch methods (Gradient methods and Newton’s method)Linear programming Standard formInequalities and slack variablesSimplex methodDualityNon-linear constrained optimization Optimality conditionsConvex optimizationSolution algorithms    Learning outcome:  The students are to learn the basic theory of optimization. More specifically, they are expected to:Explain basic concepts and results from the theorySolve simple problems analyticallyRecognize different types of optimization problemsBe able to implement a set of known algorithms in order to solve optimization problems numerically Course responsible:  Ole Løseth Elvetun   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2020-2021

Course Title: MATH290 Real analysis, sustainable teaching of mathematics  Course contents:  The most important parts of each topic are covered in lectures. The students are then given exercises on the same topics. The aims of the exercises are for students to understand methods and ideas, as well as to be able to apply the subject to relevant problems.  Learning outcome:  The students are to learn how to use mathematical ideas precisely. This is a necessary background for understanding mathematical analysis. After completing the course, students are to master:1) basic set theory, 2) axiomatic description of the different number systems, 2) basic topological ideas such as compactness, convergence and uniform convergence, 4) the Riemann integral, 5) theory of series of numbers and functions. Course responsible:  Bjørn Fredrik Nielsen   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in the spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually. The course is offered on demand and if resources allow it.   First time:  Study year 2009-2010

Course Title: MATH401 Modern Applied Mathematics Course contents:  The course content may vary from year to year, but will usually be from the following fields: differential equations, integro-differential equations, integral equations. numerical mathematics, inverse problems, statistical methods, functional analysis  Learning outcome:  Students will learn modern applied mathematics and how it can be used to study selected problems in environmental sciences, biology and physics. Course responsible:  John Andreas Wyller   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel or Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel or Spring parallel.   First time:  Study year 2012-2013

Course Title: MLA210 Machine Learning applications in finance and technology  Course contents:  Matrix- and least-squares methods for pattern recognition and data analysis applications in technology and finance. Some applications are: Time series analysis, document analysis, portfolio optimization, process control and muliti-objective optimization. The programming language Julia will be used for implementation and computations.  Learning outcome:  The students will learn both the theoretical background and how to implement the methodology for analysing data of real world applications. Course responsible:  Ulf Geir Indahl   Teachers:  Kristian Hovde Liland, Tor Kristian Stevik   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN, NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  The course is implemented and censored each spring semester.    Course frequency:  Each spring semester.   First time:  Study year 2021-2022

Course Title: MLA310 Matrix Methods for Data Analysis and Machine Learning  Course contents:  Derivation and applications of advanced matrix methods for pattern recoginition, machine learning and data analysis: The subjects include clustering, projection- and matrix factorization methods, variable selection and regularization for regression- and classification problems. We will also cover efficient computations for model selection and -validation.   Learning outcome:  The students will learn both the theoretical background and how to implement various methods for advanced analysis of research data. Course responsible:  Ulf Geir Indahl   Teachers:  Kristian Hovde Liland   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  The course is implemented and censored each fall semester. First time is the fall of 2022.   Course frequency:  Each fall semester.   First time:  Study year 2022-2023

Course Title: MVI320 Fish Processing Technology Course contents:  The course will go through key processes for processing fish and shellfish. This includes methods for slaughtering, cooling and cutting in addition to processing methods such as freezing, salting, smoking, digging, raking, drying, heat treatment and production of oil /flour. Furthermore, preparation of production plans, construction of processing plants as well as design and choice of installations and machines will be reviewed. Throughout the course, the candidates themselves will plan a slaughter and processing facility of salmon. The planning includes development of production plans, process schedules and process descriptions, and simple floor plans. Systems for the utilization of by-products and waste / sewage treatment shall also be included.  Learning outcome:  - Know the most central processes for fish processing.- Have detailed knowledge of how the fish muscle itself is affected, and what this does with taste and durability of the muscle and last how this can be varied.- Be able to prepare production plans for a fish processing plant, including the consumption of raw materials and the dispatch of finished products.- Be able to design simple sketches and plans for the construction of a fish processing plant. Course responsible:  Odd Ivar Lekang   Teachers:  Ola Tjåland   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Even years   First time:  Study year 2008-2009

Course Title: PHO302 Computational Photonics Course contents:  Maxwell's equations and basic concepts in electromagnetics.Numerical methods based on discretization such as finite differences time domain (FDTD), finite elements (FEM) and Method of Moment (MoM)Theory of convergence, stability and error analysis.Study computational problems in relevant applications such as propagation of light in waveguides, light absorption and scattering problems.Programming to implement the numerical methods for electromagnetic problems in photonics.Use of commercial software for electromagnetic problems in photonics.  Learning outcome:  In this course, the students will learn computational methods to solve relevant problems in photonics. The students will learn how to simulate and numerically solve electromagnetic problems in two and three dimensions. The students will be introduced to numerical methods based on discretization. Both programming and commercially available solvers will be used in this course. The students will receive training in communicating scientific results, through reports and oral presentations. They will be able to analyze and critically evaluate various sources of information and use them to structure and formulate scholarly arguments. Course responsible:  Achim Kohler   Teachers:  Johanne Heitmann Solheim, Beibei Kong, Maren Anna Brandsrud   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  30   Teaching exam periods:  Spring semester.   Course frequency:  Yearly.   First time:  Study year 2022-2023   Preferential right:  Photonics students have priority.

Course Title: PPFD300 Science and Mathematics Education Course contents:  Teaching and learning for sustainable development. Planning, implementing and assessing science and mathematics teaching and learning based on the curriculum, principles for and theories of teaching and learning. Nature of science and mathematics. Phenomenon-based science teaching and inquiry-based learning. Cooperative learning. Informal and formal assessments. Science education for vocational students. Interdisciplinary teaching.  Learning outcome:  KnowledgeThe candidatehas highly specialized knowledge in science and mathematics education for level 8-13has broad understanding of the school's mandate, the values in the education and the curriculumhas broad knowledge about learning strategies, arenas for learning and working methods characteristic for science and mathematics educationhas knowledge about interdisciplinary collaboration and how to support learning in the three interdisciplinary issues that are expressed in the curriculumhas knowledge about the use of science and mathematics subjects in the professionsSkillsThe candidatecan plan, implement and assess teaching applying the curriculum, research- and experience-based knowledgecan facilitate interdisciplinary learning processes in complex issuescan facilitate teaching processes which lead to good subject understanding and social learning processescan identify and work systematically with basic competenciescan use varied working methods, differentiate and adopt learning processes and create a motivating and including learning environmentcan describe levels of competency, asses and document students' learning, give feedback which promote learning and support the students' own ability to reflect on learningcan critically discuss the role of the subject in society and facilitate the use of socio-scientific issues in the classroomCompetencyThe candidatecan independently further develop own competency and support the development of both colleagues and the school organization as a wholecan critically reflect on subject issues, as well as political and value-based questions, especially related to education for sustainable developmentcan facilitate learning processes that promote students' action competencies toward sustainable developmentcan communicate issues in science and mathematical education on an advanced level.can build relations to students, colleagues and parents, and cooperate with other persons relevant for the school organization Course responsible:  Ingvild Rennemo, Martine Charlotte Liland   Teachers:  Gerd Eli Johansen, Anders Søraunet Gåre, Gunhild Storhaug, Hans Erik Lefdal, Solveig Strangstadstuen, Astrid Tonette Sinnes, Margrethe Naalsund, Nina Elisabeth Arnesen, Elise Bergli, Linda Helén Godager, Aksel Hugo   ECTS credits:  30   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in August block. This course has teaching/evaluation in August block, Autumn parallel, January block, Spring parallel, June block.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2006-2007   Preferential right:  PPU-HEL, PPU-DEL

Course Title: PPFD301 Science and Mathematics Education Course contents:  .  Learning outcome:  .KnowledgeCandidates has knowledge of the subject area's history, the subject's nature, uniqueness and place in the school and societyhas a varied repertoire of teaching strategies and working methods in the subjectshas good insight into education for sustainable development and how this teaching can be set up to promote students' ability to acthas insight into different academic challenges for student groups in different school types and fields of study, and how teaching in subjects can be arranged for different studentshas knowledge of the subject's role in interdisciplinary collaboration and how it can be facilitated for teaching in the three interdisciplinary themes the curricula emphasizehave knowledge of vocational guidance of the scienceshave knowledge of how to work systematically with basic skills and the language of the subject: concepts, genres and representations.SkillsCandidates can analyze curricula and develop local curricula as a basis for planning, implementation and assessment of own teaching based on the school's management documents, research and experience-based knowledgecan lead and motivate students in the academic work and create a constructive and inclusive learning environmentcan use different learning arenas, phenomena and students' experiences as a starting point for teachingcan differentiate the training and identify and meet different learning difficulties in the subjectscan use characteristics of goal achievement and provide good academic justifications, as well as use a wide range of forms of assessment that help to promote learning, and be able to help students reflect on their own learningcan analyze curricula in subjects and develop local plans, as well as have insight into the final assessment in the subjectcan use different learning resources to promote good learningcan lead academic conversations, and lead discussions on sustainable development with students.General competenceCandidates can create a good connection between laws and curricula and teachingcan orientate themselves in and relate critically to subject didactic literaturecan reflect on and develop their own teaching practice in subjectscan critically reflect on professional, value and political issues, especially related to education for sustainable developmentcan convey didactic issues, orally and in writing, at an advanced level Course responsible:  Margrethe Naalsund   Teachers:  Elisabeth Iversen, Edvin Østergaard, Solveig Strangstadstuen, Birgitte Bjønness, Nina Elisabeth Arnesen, Gerd Eli Johansen   ECTS credits:  25   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  .   Course frequency:  Annual.   First time:  Study year 2007-2008   Preferential right:  M-LUN

Course Title: PPFO100 Personal development Course contents:  The course will contribute to the participants' personal development. We will take as our starting point topics that are relevant to life as a student and further into the profession, such as making important choices, searching for identity and self-image, developing relationships with others and with the physical  environment, and finding context in life. The questions we address will be elucidated with theories and concepts from the professional literature and with action and motifs from the fiction and art. The purpose is for the participants to be able to influence factors that are important for their mental state and personal growth. An important skill to have is to be able to stay in your center when you are exposed to stress. We will therefore work with exercises based on meditation, focusing, sensing and movement, inner dialogue, and writing and other expressions that can work to process experiences. In this way, the course will also provide competence to be able to stand steadily in meeting other people in challenging mental situations, for example as a mentor, supervisor, colleague or in other roles where one is to assist people.  Learning outcome:  KnowledgeThe candidate- knows and can describe essential theories and perspectives on factors that can contribute to personal development.SkillsThe candidate- can reflect on the forces that apply in situations where one must make an important choice- can reflect on factors that affect one's identity and self-image and one's relationships with others- can find sources that can put one's situation and life into a larger context- can use methods to keep calm in situations that challenge one's presence.General competenceThe candidate- can accommodate other people's sharing of experiences and share their own life experiences- can take the initiative to communicate with others about matters that may affect important choices in life- can find ways for further personal development. Course responsible:  Knut Omholt   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  20   Teaching exam periods:  The course starts in the autumn parallel. The course has teaching and assessment in the autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually.   First time:  Study year 2021-2022   Preferential right:  Registration with motivation letter to the course coordinator. The motivation letter should be approx. half a page and say something about the applicant's personal reason for taking the course - what it is about what makes one apply, and what it can contribute to one's development, preferably also a few words about how one intends to use the competence one gets further. If more people sign up than the maximum number, participants will be drawn according to criteria that are determined.

Course Title: PPFO301 Introduction to Pedagogical Research Methods Course contents:  Research methods presuppose an insight into both the specific topics and the researcher's participative role and scientific approach. The course deals with both qualitative and quantitative methods as tools for researching practices of learning and teaching. Topics: phenomenology, philosophy of science, case study methodology, action research, and pedagogical research methods such as interviews, questionnaires, and observations.  Learning outcome:  The course aims at providing the students with a basis for using pedagogical research methodology in the master's thesis. Knowledge: The candidate has knowledge about research methodological issues related to subject, pedagogical and didactical questions.Skills: The candidate has knowledge about relevant literature on methodology and can apply this knowledge to own research project. The candidate can independently vary research methods to diversify and differentiate education following curricula documents.General competency: The candidate can reflect on science didactical, science philosophical, research methodological and ethical issues. Course responsible:  Edvin Østergaard   Teachers:  Gerd Eli Johansen, Gudrun Jonsdottir, Margrethe Naalsund, Birgitte Bjønness, Sigrid Marie Gjøtterud   ECTS credits:  15   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  20   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel and has teaching  and assessment in Autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2011-2012   Preferential right:  M-LUN

Course Title: PPFO401 Qualitative Method  Course contents:  Qualitative methods presuppose an insight into both the specific problem area and the researcher"s participative role and scientific approach. The course will introduce phenomenology and cultural analysis as tools for placing students" research topics in a meaningful context. In a phenomenological-hermeneutic perspective, the course will focus on qualitative methods as a double tool: in order to describe and analyse phenomena in the world and to understand our own knowledge and values. For this reason, decisive weight is placed on giving individual students the possibility for in-depth study of the method relevant for their own research. Topics: qualitative methods as a research area, phenomenology and hermeneutics, case study methodology, narrative research method, cultural understanding and analysis, performing in-depth interviews as a base for knowledge formation.  Learning outcome:  KnowledgeThe candidate can establish a basis for using qualitative research methodologySkillsThe candidate is able to use qualitative methods in their own research projectGeneral competenceThe candidate can reflect upon his/her own role in the research process. Course responsible:  Edvin Østergaard   Teachers:  Linda Sue Jolly, Erling Krogh, Knut Omholt, Margrethe Naalsund   ECTS credits:  15   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  12   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching in Spring parallel and evaluation the June block   Course frequency:  This course will be given sporadically based on demand and other relevant conditions. The course can be initiated independently of the ordinary semesters.   First time:  Study year 2004-2005   Preferential right:  PHD

Course Title: PPFO402 The Way of the Researcher Course contents:  The purpose of this course is to make the participants aware of the trials and conflicts that they may run into during their qualification as a researcher. The participants will reflect on how they handle critical incidents in their work and on what choices they make as regards the direction of their path. They will learn to communicate about the challenges one may come upon in the developmental processes so that they can talk with their students and colleagues about this.The course is intended for PhD students, people in similar qualification processes and people who teach or supervise research and development work.The process of becoming a researcher has both a professional and personal side to it. Persons who aim to present new knowledge may run into several challenges: How motivated are they really for the task? How does their research relate to their qualifications? How courageous do they dare to be when posing their questions? How open-minded can they be about different views? How much staying power will they have in their search? How independently can they sort out all possible answers? How can they bring to light what they have found? How willing are they to confront established conceptions? These questions suggest that one may, on several occasions in the research process, have to choose between keeping to a known line of action or venturing into the unknown. The way one deals with these trials on a personal level influences the quality of professional work. The personal and professional are closely linked in the discovery of new knowledge. Being aware of the potential conflicts and challenges may help in coping with them. The struggle between creating and conserving forces has always been part of life, and people have tried to delineate and understand such influences. From mythic stories and other works of art, we can see evidence of steps of the creative process. In this course, we will cast light on dilemmas in developmental processes using the participants’ own expressions; motives from mythic stories, poetry, literature and visual arts; and events from the lives of known researchers and artists.  Learning outcome:  KnowledgeThe candidate- knows what kind of dilemmas one may run into in the development as a researcher- knows motives from myths and art that reflect conflicts in the creative process SkillsThe candidate- is able to deal with conflicts in research and other developmental processes using mythic and artistic motivesGeneral competenceThe candidate- can apply images of dilemmas in creative processes in one’s supervision of students and in one’s communication with colleagues Course responsible:  Knut Omholt   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN, NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  12   Teaching exam periods:  This course has teaching in spring parallel and June block. Assessment i June block.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2006-2007   Preferential right:  PhD-students

Course Title: PPFY300 Integrative Life Science Education Course contents:  Development of own practice and practice theory as a subject teacher in science and natural sciences through didactic theory, exercises and reflection. Planning, implementation and assessment of education for sustainable development with support in didactic thinking, curricula and legislation. Central subject and vocational didactic topics are interaction between different forms of learning and learning arenas, design of learning courses and workshop learning, exploratory working methods, phenomenological and business-based learning, vocational didactic principles, reverse curriculum work, informal and formal assessment of competence and basic skills, self-regulated learning. In addition, emphasis is placed on transformative learning theory, outdoor teaching methodology and development of interdisciplinary arenas and working methods in science and nature use.  Learning outcome:  Students will develop competence in teacher education for sustainable development.Knowledge. Candidates ...has subject / vocational didactic research and experience-based knowledge aimed at steps 8-13has an understanding of the nature of the school team and the training course.has knowledge of learning arenas and working methods related to the nature / traditions of the subject / profession.Skills. Candidates ...can plan, carry out and evaluate teaching based on relevant research and experience-based knowledge and carry out professional / vocational development work.can lead and facilitate teaching processes that lead to good academic and social learning processes.can use varied and relevant working methods, use digital tools, differentiate and adapt education in relation to students' needs and in accordance with current curricula, and create a motivating and inclusive learning environment.can describe characteristics of competence, assess and document students' learning, provide learning-promoting feedback and help students to reflect on their own learning.can analyze curricula in subjects and develop local plans, as well as have insight into final assessment in the subject.can critically assess the subjects' societal role and values ​​and translate this into their own teaching.General competence. Candidates ...can independently further develop his own practice and practice theory as a subject teacher in science and natural sciences through didactic theory, exercises and reflectioncan critically reflect on professional / professional, ethical and political issues, especially related to education for sustainable development.can convey subject and vocational didactic issues within a professional community of practice.can facilitate entrepreneurship, new thinking and innovation, and that local working, social and cultural life is involved in the trainingcan stimulate professional pride, reflection and collaboration on and development of learning and teaching in authentic professional situations. Course responsible:  Aksel Hugo   Teachers:  Kristian Bergersen, Martine Charlotte Liland, Edvin Østergaard, Solveig Strangstadstuen, Astrid Tonette Sinnes, Birgitte Bjønness, Nina Elisabeth Arnesen, Erling Krogh, Sigrid Marie Gjøtterud   ECTS credits:  30   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  .   Teaching exam periods:  The course starts in the August block, goes through Autumn parallel, January block, Spring parallel and into the June block.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2006-2007   Preferential right:  PPU-HEL, PPU-DEL

Course Title: PPPE300 Pedagogy Course contents:  The subject Pedagogy in practical pedagogical education is based on vision on ESD, highlighting the social dimension and citizenship and diversity. The subject is also based on the Education Act preamble and the ethical platform of the teaching profession. The subject includes perspectives on how education and training can contribute to students' academic, social and personal learning, development and Bildung. Through the course, the student will prepare to deal with the challenges and opportunities inherent in multicultural training venues.Pedagogy is a subject of culture and academic science, which links linking history, culture, spirituality and politics together and the subject shall contribute the students' ability to critically analyse the challenges in the role of the teacher and the school organisation. Central to the subject is also to develop students' relational skills in such a way that they are able to build a constructive and inclusive learning environment and meet students, parents and colleagues with professional and interpersonal skills. The subject will contribute to the student experience progression, unity and coherence.  Learning outcome:  Knowledge Candidate• knows research-based knowledge about education and training in a society based on visions of democracy, sustainable future, diversity, equality and equality• can explain adapted training, as well as different strategies for class and learning management• can reflect on children and young people's development, motivation, learning and socialization with support from research-based knowledge• knows and can stay up to date on basic knowledge of current legislation and planning for the practice of the profession, and see this in relation to the school's mandate and the values ​​of the education• has knowledge of Sami conditions and the status of indigenous peoples internationally, as well as Sami children and young people's right to education in and in Sami• has knowledge of difficult life situations that children and young people can get into, as well as knowledge of relevant help agencies• can explain, with the support of professional literature, the connection between individual, social and cultural factors in a diverse learning community.Skills Candidate • can create motivating and inclusive learning environments that take into account student diversity• can analyze and discuss content and challenges in the Education Act, curricula and other management documents as a starting point for their professional practice• can guide, provide learning-promoting feedback and help students to reflect on their own learning and professional development• ability to build relationships with, communicate and collaborate with students, colleagues, parents and agencies that support the school• can participate in, plan research-based development work in the school, and evaluate the work critically afterwards• can critically assess adapted education in the light of citizenship / democracy, life skills and sustainability perspectives.General competenceCandidate• has developed his own teacher identity and a critical perspective oriented towards professional development and collaboration in a professional community• has developed awareness of own communication and relationship skills and can handle different types of feedback from students, colleagues, supervisors and fellow students• can meet all students, parents and colleagues through dialogue and with respect• can orientate himself in professional literature, raise relevant critical questions as part of the development of his own professional practice• can further develop own competence and contribute to both colleagues' and the school's professional development• can contribute to a good psychosocial learning environment as well as prevent bullying and perform the activity duty. Course responsible:  Gudrun Jonsdottir   Teachers:  Sigrid Marie Gjøtterud, Knut Omholt, Hans Erik Lefdal, Erling Krogh, Solveig Strangstadstuen   ECTS credits:  30   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in August block. This course has teaching/evaluation in August block, Autumn parallel, January block, Spring parallel, June block.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2004-2005   Preferential right:  PPU-HEL, PPU-DEL

Course Title: PPPE301 Pedagogy - LUR Course contents:  The subject of pedagogy is a subject of culture and science that connects history, culture, views on life and politics. The core of the subject includes perspectives on how upbringing and teaching can contribute to students' identity development, formation, and learning, in an increasingly knowledge-intensive society. At NMBU, the subject of pedagogy is linked to the teacher education's vision of Education for Sustainable Development, with emphasis on student perspectives. With this, emphasis is placed on how the teacher in teaching can contribute to the students developing both as individuals, fellow human beings and active participants in democracy and social development. The subject is linked to legislation and curricula for the education. The subject must support the student's development of their own teacher identity, based on professional ethics principles.The student must show the ability to critically analyze the role of the teacher and the school's activities. The subject of pedagogy is anchored in the Education Act, the regulations of the education and curriculum. In the study, the student must prepare to deal with challenges and opportunities that lie in the use of multicultural learning arenas to promote cooperation, diversity, citizenship, and life skills. Central to the subject is also developing students' relational skills. These skills will strengthen students' ability to build a constructive and inclusive learning environment. They will also strengthen their ability to meet students, parents, and colleagues with professional and interpersonal skills. The course pedagogy will contribute to the student experiencing progression, wholeness, and coherence in the study.  Learning outcome:  KnowledgeCandidatesknows research-based knowledge about education and training in a society based on visions of democracy, diversity, equality, and equalitycan discuss adapted and differentiated training, as well as the use of learning strategiescan explain strategies for leading diverse learning communitiescan, with the support of research-based knowledge, reflect on children and young people's development, motivation, learning and socializationcan discuss connections between individual, social, and cultural factors in a diverse and multicultural learning communitycan account for connections between educational history, the school's mandate, and valueshave knowledge of the status of education for Sami and indigenous peoples, and their rights to education in their own languagecan account for the school as an organization, as well as current laws, conventions, and curricula for the practice of the professionhave knowledge of difficult life situations and issues that children and young people may encounter and what rights and which supporting bodies it may be relevant to cooperate with.SkillsCandidates• can create a motivating, constructive and inclusive learning environment that considers student diversity• can analyze and discuss content and challenges in legislation, curricula, and management documents as a starting point for their own professional practice• can guide and provide learning-promoting feedback and help students to reflect on their own learning and professional development• can build relationships with, communicate, and collaborate with students, colleagues, parents, and agencies that support the school• can participate in and plan research-based development work in the school, as well as evaluate the work critically afterwards• can critically assess adapted education in the light of perspectives on citizenship, sustainability, democracy, and life skills.General knowledge Candidates• has developed its own teacher identity and a critical perspective oriented towards professional development and collaboration in professional communities• can further develop awareness of own communication and relational competence and handle feedback from students, colleagues, leaders, and parents• can meet all students, parents, and colleagues through dialogue and with respect• can orientate themselves in professional literature, raise relevant questions, explore, and discuss these critically and develop their own professional practice• can further develop their own competence and contribute to both colleagues' and the school's professional development• can contribute to a good psychosocial learning environment as well as prevent bullying and perform the activity duty. Course responsible:  Nora Elise Rud Jacobsen   Teachers:  Hans Erik Lefdal, Knut Omholt, Gudrun Jonsdottir, Erling Krogh   ECTS credits:  25   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in August block. This course has modules with teaching/evaluation in August block, autumn parallel, January block, spring parallel, June block.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2007-2008   Preferential right:  M-LUN

Course Title: PPPE302 Pedagogy for Agriculture, Fishing and Forestry Course contents:  Pedagogy is a subject of culture and academic science, which links history, culture, life views and politics together. The core of the subject includes perspectives on how upbringing and teaching can contribute to students' academic, social, and personal learning, in an increasingly knowledge-intensive society. At NMBU, the subject of pedagogy is linked to the teacher education's vision of Education for Sustainable Development. The subject emphasizes student perspectives, which in the teacher's teaching should promote students' formation and development both as an individual, a fellow human being and an active participant in democracy and social development. The subject must also contribute to the student's teacher identity, with teaching that is based on professional and ethical principles. The student must show the ability to critically analyze the role of the teacher and the school's activities, the school organization and the field of nature use and management. The subject of pedagogy is anchored in the Education Act, and the regulations and curriculum of the education. In the study, the student must prepare to deal with challenges and opportunities that lie in the use of multicultural learning arenas to promote cooperation, diversity, citizenship, and life skills. Central to the subject is also to develop students' relational skills in such a way that they can build a constructive and inclusive learning environment and meet students, parents, and colleagues with professional and interpersonal skills. The course pedagogy will contribute to the student experiencing progression, wholeness, and coherence in the study.  Learning outcome:  Knowledge Candidates:can explain strategies for leading diverse learning communities, in the school and in various nature based arenascan reflect on students’ development, motivation, learning and socialization with support from research-based knowledgecan discuss connections between individual, social and cultural factors in a diverse and multicultural learning community, including upbringing cultures, agricultural occupational cultures and life formscan explain strategies for relationship building with and between students, colleagues and parentscan account for connections between educational history, including Sami educational history, the school's mandate, the vocational training in nature use and the teacher's role in the school and societycan describe the school organization, as well as relevant laws, conventions and curricula that are central to the vocational education in nature usecan discuss the role of nature management education in Norwegian societyhave knowledge of how societal trends affect nature use in business and leisure and the need for competence in school, work and community lifehave knowledge of difficult life situations and issues that children and young people may encounter and what rights and support bodies it may be relevant to cooperate withknow research-based knowledge about education and training in a society based on visions of democracy, diversity, and equality.Skills Candidatescan create a motivating, constructive and inclusive learning environment that considers student diversitycan analyze and discuss content and challenges in legislation and curricula as a starting point for their own professional practicecan guide and provide learning-promoting feedback and help students to reflect on their own learning and professional developmentcan guide students in making further educational choices from the lower secondary level to vocational trainingcan build relationships with, communicate, and collaborate with students, colleagues, parents, and other bodies associated with the schoolcan participate in and plan research-based development work in the school, as well as evaluate the work criticallycan critically assess adapted vocational education in the light of perspectives on and life skills, citizenship, democracy and sustainable management of nature resourcesGeneral competence Candidatescan meet all students, parents and colleagues through dialogue and respectcan further develop their own competence as vocational teacher and contribute to both colleagues' and the school's professional developmentcan orientate themselves in professional literature, raise relevant questions, explore, and discuss these critically and develop their own professional practicecan reflect on how emotional and willful aspects in students can affect their learning and collaboration with otherscan contribute to a good psycho-social learning environment as well as prevent bullying and perform the activity duty. Course responsible:  Sigrid Marie Gjøtterud, Anders Grydeland   Teachers:  Gudrun Jonsdottir, Knut Omholt, Erling Krogh, Solveig Strangstadstuen, Hans Erik Lefdal   ECTS credits:  30   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  The course starts in August block. This course has teaching/evaluation in August block, Autumn parallel, January block, Spring parallel, June block.   Course frequency:  Annual   First time:  Study year 2021-2022   Preferential right:  Admitted to PPU, with teaching competence in Programme for Agrigulture, Forestry and Fishery, or a combination of  Agrigulture, Forestry and Fishery and science, borth part-time and full-time

Course Title: PPRA200 Teaching Practice Course contents:  .  Learning outcome:  . Course responsible:  Nina Elisabeth Arnesen   Teachers:  Hans Erik Lefdal, Nora Elise Rud Jacobsen, Solveig Strangstadstuen, Margrethe Naalsund, Gerd Eli Johansen   ECTS credits:  0   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  35   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in August block. This course has teaching/evaluation in August block, Autumn parallel, January block, Spring parallel, June block. See detailed plan for the subject in Canvas.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2014-2015   Preferential right:  M-LUN

Course Title: PPRA201 Teaching Practice Course contents:  The course consists of 15 days with supervised teaching practice. During these days, the students shall plan, execute and evaluate their teaching practice in cooperation with the supervisors.  Learning outcome:  . Course responsible:  Nina Elisabeth Arnesen   Teachers:  Nora Elise Rud Jacobsen, Hans Erik Lefdal, Solveig Strangstadstuen, Margrethe Naalsund   ECTS credits:  0   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  30   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in August block. This course has teaching/evaluation in August block, Autumn parallel, January block, Spring parallel, June block. See detailed plan for the subject in Canvas.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2004-2005   Preferential right:  M-LUN

Course Title: PPRA300 Teaching Practice Course contents:  The course consists of 60 days with supervised teaching practice. During these weeks, the students shall plan, execute and evaluate their teaching practice in cooperation with the supervisors. The practicum is divided into 2-3 periods throghout the study. During one periode the student should plan, execute and evaluate his/her own practice i collaboration with a supervisor. There will be up to two meetings between the student and a teacher from NMBU. During the meeting the students' development as teacher should be discussed in light of information given from the school/practice place and education institution.  Learning outcome:  The course is linked to the learning outcome descriptions in the course’s pedagogy and subject / vocational didactics. Students must have developed competencies for education for sustainable development.KnowledgeCandidateshas knowledge of the vocational / program subject and its role in its own program areahas experience-based knowledge of students' learning processes and assessment as, for and of learninghas experience-based knowledge of the interaction between students and between students and teachers from 8th to 13th gradehas experience-based knowledge of school management, class management, teamwork, and knowledge of school-home collaborationhas experience-based knowledge of research and development work in schoolshas experience-based knowledge of how education for sustainable development can be arrangedhas knowledge of the teacher's role, rights, and duties. has experience-based knowledge of learning strategies, learning arenas, and working methods related to the nature of the profession / subjectSkillsCandidatescan lead and facilitate teaching processes that lead to good academic and psycho-social learning processes, which promote life skillscan plan, implement, adapt, and evaluate training for a diverse group of students in accordance with legislation and planningcan lead interdisciplinary learning processes in complex issues, especially with emphasis on sustainable developmentcan apply, justify, and vary between a wide range of teaching and assessment methods including the use of digital toolscan adjust learning activities as needed and facilitate student participationcan enter collaboration with colleagues / management to facilitate teaching for students with special needs, and report in case of suspicion of intoxication and violencecan master relevant professional tools, techniques, and forms of expression, and reflect on their own professional practice and adjust this under supervisioncan contribute to the subjects being practiced and vocationally oriented through the students' interests and in collaboration with colleagues and relevant actors in working lifeGeneral competenceCandidatescan reflect on and critically assess, the content of education and students' learning considering current curricula, and clearly convey identity and pride in the subject / professioncan take responsibility for reflecting on their own development as a teacher and participate professionally in collaboration and development work in the trainingcan build good relationships and communicate well with studentscan collaborate and communicate well with colleagues, parents, and other professions in the schoolcan critically reflect on professional, ethical, and political issues, including education for sustainable developmentcan contribute to change processes and collaboration on academic and pedagogical innovation in schools and involve local community, work, and cultural life in education Course responsible:  Martine Charlotte Liland   Teachers:  Gerd Eli Johansen, Edvin Østergaard, Sigrid Marie Gjøtterud, Erling Krogh, Solveig Strangstadstuen, Astrid Tonette Sinnes, Birgitte Bjønness, Gudrun Jonsdottir, Margrethe Naalsund, Nina Elisabeth Arnesen, Knut Omholt, Erling Krogh, Hans Erik Lefdal   ECTS credits:  0   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  .   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in August block. This course has teaching/evaluation in August block, Autumn parallel, January block, Spring parallel, June block.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2004-2005   Preferential right:  PPU-HEL, PPU-DEL

Course Title: PPRA301 Teaching Practice - LUR Course contents:  .  Learning outcome:  Knowledge Candidates• Has knowledge of the program subject and its role in its own program area.• Has experience-based knowledge of students' learning processes and assessment as, for and of learning.• Has experience-based knowledge about the interaction between students and between students and teacher’s 8th to 13th grade.• Has experience-based knowledge of school management, class management, teamwork, and school-home collaboration• Has experience-based knowledge of research and development work in the school• Has experience-based knowledge of how education for sustainable development can be arranged• Has knowledge of the teacher's role, rights, and duties.• Has experience-based knowledge of learning strategies, learning arenas, and working methods related to the nature of the subject and to interdisciplinary topics.Skills Candidates• can lead and facilitate teaching processes that lead to good academic and psycho-social learning processes, which promote life skills.• can plan, implement, adapt, and evaluate training for a diverse group of students in accordance with legislation and planning.• can lead interdisciplinary learning processes in complex issues, especially with emphasis on sustainable development.• can apply, justify, and vary between a wide range of teaching and assessment methods, including the use of digital tools• can adjust learning activities as needed and facilitate student participation.• can enter collaboration with colleagues / management to facilitate teaching for students with special needs, and report in case of suspicion of intoxication and violence.• can master relevant professional tools, techniques, and forms of expression, and reflect on their own professional practice and adjust this under supervision.• can contribute to the subjects being practiced and vocationally oriented through the students' interests and in collaboration with colleagues and relevant actors in working life.General competence Candidates• can reflect on and critically assess, the content of education and students' learning considering current curricula, and clearly convey identity and pride in the subject / profession• can take responsibility for reflecting on own development as a teacher and participate professionally in collaboration and development work in the training• can build good relationships and communicate well with students• can collaborate and communicate well with colleagues, parents, and other professions in the school• can critically reflect on professional, ethical, and political issues, including education for sustainable development.• can contribute to change processes and collaboration on academic and pedagogical innovation in schools and involve local community, work, and cultural life in education. Course responsible:  Hans Erik Lefdal   Teachers:  Hanne Alsvik Øygarden, Nora Elise Rud Jacobsen, Gerd Eli Johansen, Solveig Strangstadstuen, Astrid Tonette Sinnes, Birgitte Bjønness, Nina Elisabeth Arnesen, Edvin Østergaard, Margrethe Naalsund, Solveig Strangstadstuen   ECTS credits:  0   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  35   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in August block. This course has teaching/evaluation in August block, Autumn parallel, January block, Spring parallel, June block,   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2007-2008   Preferential right:  M-LUN

Course Title: PPUB401 Perspectives on Science and Technology Education Course contents:  The four modules are:Module 1: Perspectives on learning science, including historical development in science teaching thinking: constructivism, sociocultural perspectives, situated learning, phenomenological perspectives on science learning, scientific literacy, text and language in science teaching and learning.Module 2: The nature of scientific knowledge and practices, the role of cultural contexts and history and philosophy of science in science teaching and learning, inquiry-based teaching, gender and indigenous knowledge in science learning.Module 3: Perspectives on technology as knowledge and practice, relations between technology, science and society, knowledge structures in technology and technology as part of science teaching.Module 4: Education for sustainable development, action competence for sustainability, normativity in education and whole school Development.The teaching consists of lectures and student-led seminars, distributed over four modules. Together, the modules cover a wide range of perspectives and current issues in science education research internationally.Students read the core literature of all 4 modules, and choose in addition specialization literature for one of the modules. One may also combine modules in the selection of specialization literature.  Learning outcome:  Learning outcomeKnowledgehas advanced overview of current, and historical and philosophical perspectives in science educationhas insights into characteristics of text norms in science and into the role of language in science teachingis able to acknowledge the complexity and variation of scientific and technological knowledge and practiceshas insights in how technological knowledge can be conceptualized and the roles technology may play in science educationhas knowledge about sustainable development and the role of science education in contributing to sustainabilitySkillsis able to identify the historical-philosophical roots of new trends in science education, and recognize and compare theoretical perspectives on learning in textbooks and academic discourseis able to analyze communication and argumentation patterns in science teaching discourses at advanced levelis able to use perspectives from science education research in own researchis able to discuss the nature of professional scientific and technological practices and question how they appear in textbooks and other materials for science teachingis able to frame research and education to contribute to sustainable developmentis able to analyze and plan research that reflects the gender dimensions of science.General competenceis able to identify, convey and discuss perspectives on science teaching and learning, orally as well as in writingis able to use perspectives and evidence from science education research in independent and consistent argumentation. Course responsible:  Gerd Eli Johansen   Teachers:  Astrid Tonette Sinnes, Birgitte Bjønness, Edvin Østergaard   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  40.   Teaching exam periods:  Spring.   Course frequency:  <p>Biennially (odd numbers).</p><p>The course will not be available for the academic year 2021-22. The next opportunity will according to plan be spring 2023.</p>   First time:  Study year 2019-2020   Preferential right:  .

Course Title: PPUN400 Teaching and Learning in Higher Education - Scientific Staff Course contents:  The course deals with central perspectives, theories and principles related to teaching at the university/university college level. The course is highly experience-based, and the knowledge is tested in practice through the participants' own arrangement and accomplishment of teaching under the guidance of other participants and the teachers.  Learning outcome:  KnowledgeThe candidate- knows the essential learning theories and perspectives on teaching and learning- knows the principles of how to design teaching and promote learning- knows the national qualification framework- can describe types and levels of learning- knows a broad specter of teachng methods, first and foremost those which activate the students- knows methods of supervision and how to further the development of groups- knows different forms of evaluation of learning- knows how to get feedback on one’s own teaching- can describe specific ways of teaching in one’s own field- can describe how the curriculum of one's teaching relates to principles of education for sustainable developmentSkillsThe candidate- can choose, give the grounds for and evaluate objects, content, and methods of teaching and evaluation in one’s work- can develop new courses- can supervise individual students and groups of students and facilitate supervision among colleaguesGeneric competenciesThe candidate- can develop relations to students and colleagues to promote a good learning environment- can ask for feedback on one’s own teaching and take actions to improve the teaching- can develop one’s over all competence as a teacher- can implement adequate corrections and innovations in a course- can see how one’s own course is related to other courses in the study programme and take part in the development of the programme as a whole- can take part in discussions of questions regarding teaching in higher education in relevant fora- can share one’s experiences as a teacher with colleagues and improve the learning environment at one’s institute and at the university- can do research on one’s own teaching and get it published. Course responsible:  Knut Omholt   Teachers:  Linda Helén Godager, Michael Kirby Moulton, Sigrid Marie Gjøtterud   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  20   Teaching exam periods:  The course starts in autumn parallel. The course has teaching in autumn parallel and spring parallel. Evaluation i spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2005-2006   Preferential right:  Newly and permanent employees with compulsory teaching at NMBU.

Course Title: PPUT301 Science and Technology in School and Society - LUN/Agricultural Resouce Management (LUN) Course contents:  The students are to develop their use of educational theory by studying literature on educational theory and written texts where the theories are applied to students' research questions. If three or more students participate in the course, it will include mandatory seminars where students take an active part by presenting, discussing and by providing feedback on other students texts. This constitutes the main part of the course.  Learning outcome:  The course shall provide students with adcanced knowledge in science education or agriculture education by investigating relevant literature and key issues in occupational practice, and apply this literature to their own problem formulations within these fields of study. The students are expected to develop the correct use of citations and be able to discuss and review literature. Literature shall be used actively in the students" written work and empirical research. Through presentations and discussions, the students should develop their own opinions about educational theories and principles in the natural sciences. The course aims to give the students a firm basis for their master's theses. Course responsible:  Gerd Eli Johansen   Teachers:  Edvin Østergaard, Sigrid Marie Gjøtterud, Erling Krogh, Astrid Tonette Sinnes, Margrethe Naalsund, Aksel Hugo, Birgitte Bjønness   ECTS credits:  20   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  20   Teaching exam periods:  Start in the August block and lessons/teaching and assignments in the Autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2011-2012   Preferential right:  M-LUN

Course Title: PPVE200 Counselling 1 Course contents:  Target groups: Supervisors and advisers in the higher education sector and teachers in NMBU's university schools, partnership schools and partner schools in DEKOMP, which have supervision tasks for teacher students and newly qualified teachers.Requirements for supervision competence for practice teachers in teacher education: The requirements are described in national guidelines for teacher education, in the Vocational Training Promise and UDIR's supervision of newly qualified teachers.PPVE200 15. ECTS. is part 1 of a supervisor education of a total of 30 ECTS. Part 2 is the subject PPVE210, 15 ECTS.Topics: Guidance strategies and skills, including communication, listening and advocacy skills. The starting point for the supervisor training is the goals, law and planning of the education and training in question. The supervisor training shall be linked to the target groups' work tasks and their need for competence development.  Learning outcome:  The aim is to develop competence as counsellors for student teachers and other persons involved in any kind of teaching activity. The participants will become familiar with, reflect upon and be able to fulfil the requirements for the counselling assignment. They will be able to use various strategies and tools for counselling. Course responsible:  Hans Erik Lefdal   Teachers:  Sigrid Marie Gjøtterud, Knut Omholt, Solveig Strangstadstuen   ECTS credits:  15   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  Minimum 8 and maximum 24   Teaching exam periods:  This course has teaching/evaluation in January Block, Spring Parallel and Autumn Parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2017-2018   Preferential right:  .

Course Title: PPVE210 Counselling 2 Course contents:  Supervision pedagogy Target group: Teachers who are supervisors for the newly appointed teachers.As part of the strategy 'Teacher education 2025', the Parliament in Norway made the following decision in 2017: «The Parliamient asks the government in collaboration with the parties to formulate a national framework for a guidance scheme for newly appointed teachers which ensures that all new employees are covered by the scheme.»The Ministry has prepared: "Principles and obligations for the supervision of newly qualified and appointed teachers in kindergarten and school." See: https://www.nyutdannede.no/media/1212/veiledning-av-nyutdannede-nytilsatte-larere-i-barnehage-og-skole.pdf (read 21.02.2021).The course will contribute to competence development for supervisors for newly appointed teachers. The newly graduated must be included in and be able to be a resource in the professional community. The responsibility for taking care of newly appointed teachers in a good way lies locally with the employer (cf. the Working Environment Act § 4-2, the Education Act § 10-8 and the Free Schools Act § 5-2 second paragraph letter i).  Learning outcome:  Knowledge. The candidatehas knowledge of how the professional teacher identity is developed through social interaction, experience and structural changeshave insight into the newly appointed teachers' qualifications and how they can be included as a resource and contributor in the professional communityhas knowledge of guidance, its strategies and skills, and how these can contribute to the development and learning of the newly appointed teachershas insight into how to integrate and express both the professional, relational and emotional in the guidance conversation.Skills. The candidate:can, based on the the newly appointed's needs and goals, initiate and include them in the school's mandate and organization, and in the teacher's tasks and responsibilities in the professional communitycan in a systematic way plan, implement, observe and critically reflect on the course of supervision together with the newly appointed teachers individually and in a groupcan recognize and show respect for the newly appointed teachers, and can express the power one has as a colleague and supervisor in the dialogue with them (s)can contribute to the newly appointed teachers' participating in collaboration with colleagues and students and facilitate reflection on change measures in teaching and school developmentcan take the initiative to collaborate on ethical reflection and judgment in dialogue with the newly appointed teachers and the college.General competencies. The candidate:can reflect on and act on the basis of ethical professional guidance.can respect the competence of others and recognize the limits of their own competence as a supervisor and teachercan further develop in the college and indivdually further develop her/his professional guidance, by reflecting critically on her/his own guidance together with the graduate (s) and with support in the literature of the profession. Course responsible:  Hans Erik Lefdal   ECTS credits:  15   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  Minimum 10 and maximum 24 participants.   Teaching exam periods:  The course has teaching and assessment in the spring semester.   Course frequency:  Every other year.   First time:  Study year 2020-2021   Preferential right:  Teachers in the school who have supervision assignments for teacher students and newly qualified teachers.

Course Title: PPVE400 Master and phd supervision Course contents:  The study will provide insight into pedagogical supervising  theories, basic principles and models related to master's and PhD supervision. The participants also gain practical experience with the use of the guidance principles and models. The relational aspects of supervision are emphasized. Because many master's and PhD students experience challenging periods in their studies, we also emphasize the difficult supervision conversation. Intercultural guidance is another topic that is highlighted. Furthermore, ethical perspectives on guidance related to the relationship, process and product are central. The program will also increase awareness of how framework conditions for supervision of master's and PhD students (at NMBU) affect supervision.  Learning outcome:  KnowledgeCandidatesCan provide examples of and discuss key topics, theories, issues, processes, tools and methods related to the supervision of master's and PHD studentsCan provide examples of research and development work in the field of guidance in higher educationSkillsCandidatescan assess and use relevant strategies and methods for supervision of master's and PhD students that promote ethical awareness, critical thinking, creativity and independencecan update their knowledge within the subject areaGeneral competenceCandidatescan analyze relevant guidance ethical issuescan communicate about and discuss supervision issues with colleagues and studentscan contribute to innovation in the organization and implementation of master's and PHD supervision at its own faculty and at the university Course responsible:  Sigrid Marie Gjøtterud   Teachers:  Knut Omholt   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN, NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  22   Teaching exam periods:  Teaching in spring parallel and assessment in June block   Course frequency:  Annual   First time:  Study year 2019-2020   Preferential right:  Academic emplyees who either supervise master's and / or PhD studentsEmployees who are to apply for promotion to professor or will apply for merit on the basis of teachingAcademic employees with at least 25% position at NMBU

Course Title: PPXP100 Ex. Paed. Course contents:  .  Learning outcome:  . Course responsible:  Gerd Eli Johansen   Teachers:  Nina Elisabeth Arnesen, Nina Elisabeth Arnesen, Hans Erik Lefdal   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  35   Teaching exam periods:  The course starts in August block. The course has teaching in august block, autumn parallel, january block. The course has evaluation in august block, autumn parallel, january block and spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2004-2005   Preferential right:  25 spots are reserved for first year student from the teacher training program. The remaining spots are for those starting the teacher training program with previous relevant education.

Course Title: PPYD300 Education in Natural Resource Management Course contents:  The course consists ofTheme group 1: Management of learning-processes - management of learning- and development in individual and group perspectivesTheme group 2: The school in the society - management of learning- and development in an organisational and societal perspectivesTopics: Planning, implementing and assessing teaching based on didactical principles, theories and experiences. Informal and formal assessment. Inductive learning and experiential learning. Analysis of qualifications as the basis for teaching and learning. General direction of professional studies. Use of nature and accociated education seen in societal perspectives. Entrepeneurship and development projects.  For more information, see National Curriculum Regulations for Practical and Didactic Education and NMBU's Course Curriculum for Practical and Didactic Education.  Learning outcome:  The students shall be able to implement, support and justify teaching with the help of didactical principles, experiences and theories. Course responsible:  Kristian Bergersen, Erling Krogh   Teachers:  Martine Charlotte Liland, Erling Krogh   ECTS credits:  30   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  .   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in August block. This course has teaching/evaluation in August block, Autumn parallel, January block, Spring parallel, June block.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2004-2005   Preferential right:  PPU-HEL, PPU-DEL

Course Title: SPE-M-MR Special SyllabusECTS credits:  0   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   First time:  Study year 2015-2016

Course Title: SPE-M-RB Special SyllabusECTS credits:  0   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   First time:  Study year 2019-2020

Course Title: SPE-M-VM Special SyllabusECTS credits:  0   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   First time:  Study year 2020-2021

Course Title: TBA100 The Heritage of Buildings Course contents:  The course is designed with a focus on western construction tradition through time. This refers to both residence buildings, churches, urban history and other buildings in general, with emphasis on architecture, cultural history, iconography and engineering. The variety of building traditions will be discussed in relation to natural conditions and general historical development and evolution of styles. It is also relevant to see buildings in relation to industrial history, e.g. history of agriculture. A group of issues connected to preservation and mending of old houses shall also be discussed. Participation is compulsory for the exercises and excursions. At the end of the course a paper has to be provided with a theme related to the subject of the course.  Learning outcome:  The students should get an overview of the main trends in construction tradition, architectural history and building preservation organisation and instruments. They should be able to describe and place typical buildings in place and time, and give simple advice regarding building preservation. The students should get a positive relation to building preservation, both as good resource use and valuable cultural items. Course responsible:  Martin Ebert   Teachers:  Leif Daniel Houck   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2004-2005

Course Title: TBA110 Free-Hand Drawing Course contents:  Practice free-hand drawing for a three-dimensional perspective through drawing space models. Studies of design and detail presentation of chosen building environments. Daily exercises in pencil, ink and colours during the whole course at NMBU and excursions.  Learning outcome:  To teach drawing and sketching techniques with the goal of using drawing as a tool for explaining ideas and opinions. Course responsible:  Martin Ebert   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in June block. This course has teaching/evaluation in June block.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2004-2005

Course Title: TBA150 Building Analysis  Course contents:  The course introduces to the basic principles of building analysis by observing buildings. The course focuses on the interactive relation between architecture, structure, building materials and technical installations. By observing existing buildings the course is training the students ability to describe and analyse different solutions in buildings.  Learning outcome:  The students will learn to observe and understand the complex relation between architecture, construction, technical design and interior of buildings.  Course responsible:  Arnkell Jonas Petersen   Teachers:  Leif Daniel Houck   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN, NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in autumn semester. This course has teaching/evaluation in autumn semester.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2021-2022

Course Title: TBA190 Buildings of wood with sustainability Course contents:  Sustainabillity through BREEAM. Brief historic overview: houses in Norway. Installations, heating, indoors climate, ventilation. Moisture mechanics, vapour, humidity, sound regulation, fire protection. Building materials: wood and wood-based, metals, glass, plastics, concrete. Constructions, foundations, basement walls, stories separators, walls, roof constructions, etc.  Learning outcome:  The course should give the students a basic understanding of: the building of residences and other simple constructions, building physics (with focus on heat and moisture movements), properties of building materials, indoor climate and ventilation, requirements for fire resistance and sound regulation in buildings, choice of materials and constructions for fulfilling various requirements. Course responsible:  Iver Frimannslund   Teachers:  Tormod Aurlien, Einar Nathan   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  -   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2003-2004

Course Title: TBA201 Soil Mechanics Course contents:  Physical properties and behaviour of soils, pore pressure and stability. Foundation engineering.  Learning outcome:  The students shall upon completion of the course understand physical characteristics of soil, stresses  and strains, settlements, shear strength and flow of water through soils. The students shall also have knowledge about laboratory- and ground investigations.. The students should be able to conduct basic analysis of stability, earth pressure, settlements and bearing capacity.. Course responsible:  Jan Vaslestad   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2007-2008

Course Title: TBA202 Chemistry of building material Course contents:  .  Learning outcome:  . Course responsible:  Arnkell Jonas Petersen   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in autumn semester. This course has teaching/evaluation in autumn semester.   Course frequency:  Annually.   First time:  Study year 2022-2023

Course Title: TBA210 Building physics with sustainability Course contents:  The course is based on TBA190 (Wooden Buildings) and will cover some of the topics introduced there more thoroughly. Special emphasis is placed on indoor climate, ventilation and energy conservation in buildings. In addition, the following topics will be covered: acoustics and fire protection.  Learning outcome:  The students are to acquire knowledge of the most important principles of good house building technique. Through knowledge of the physics of buildings and the most important building materials, the students should be able to construct the various parts of houses and simple industrial buildings. Sustainability is handled by the BREEAM-method. Course responsible:  Kjetil Novang Gulbrandsen, Tormod Aurlien   Teachers:  Thomas Kringlebotn Thiis   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  -   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2004-2005

Course Title: TBA215 Structural Analysis  Course contents:  Statically determinate structures: Beams, plane trusses and frames. Axial force, shear force and bending moment distribution in structures.Deflection - Deflection Diagrams and the Elastic Curve - Elastic Beam Theory - The Double Integration Method. Moment-Area Theorems - Conjugate Beam MethodDeflection - Deflection Using Energy Methods - External Work and Strain Energy. Deflections using Energy Methods - Castiglino's Theorem - Principle of Virtual Work.Deflection - Method of Virtual Work: Beams and Frames. Virtual Strain Energy caused by Axial Load, Shear, Torsion, and TemperatureStatic indeterminate systems. Principle of virtual work. Strain energy. Virtual displacements and virtual forces. Unit load method[RT1] .1. Advantages of indeterminate structures; Conditions: - Equilibrium, Compatibility and Force-Displacement; Analysis Procedure. Applications to Beams2. Displacement Method of Analysis:  Application to Beam and Frames Analysis: Analysis Procedure; Examples3. Beam Analysis using The Stiffness Method4. Plane Frame Analysis using The Stiffness Method -  5. Structural Modelling and Computer Aided Design SAP2000. Is it really necessary to be so specific in this syllabus?  Learning outcome:  The candidate will get knowledge in:- Background and use of the equations of equilibrium- The behavior of typical components as bars, beams and cables.- Definition of stress, strain, elasticity and lateral contraction- Basic assumptions in linear beam theory- The difference between statically determinate and indeterminate structures- Definition of shear stress, shear strain and shear modulus- Source and distribution of shear stresses in beams-  Energy principals: Virtual work and stationary potential energy- Principle of virtual displacements and principle of virtual forces- Background and use of unit-load method-  Determination of the elastic deflections of a beam using the method of double integration and two important geometrical methods, namely, the moment-area theorems and the conjugate-beam method.- Understanding the application of energy methods to solve problems involving slope and deflection- Application of the force or flexibility method to analyze statically indeterminate trusses, beams, and frames- Understanding the basic ideas for analyzing structures using the displacement method of analysis- Understanding the application of the slope-deflection and moment distribution methods to analyze beams and frames composed of non-prismatic members.- Using the basic fundamentals of the stiffness method for analyzing structures.- Knowledge of using computer programs in structural engineering. Course responsible:  Ebenezer Ussher, Roberto Tomasi   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in autumn semester. This course has teaching / evaluation in autumn semester.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2022-2023

Course Title: TBA222 Construction - Steel and Wood Course contents:  Course main content is structural engineering.Steel as construction material, stresses in steel, calculations of steel beams including tilting and deflection, calculation of pillars, introduction of point loads on beams and bracing against tilting and buckling. Dimensioning of welded and bolted connections.Wood as a construction material, tensions in wood, impact of moisture and load duration on strength properties, glulam, calculating beams including tilting and deflection, calculating columns. Mechanical three compounds: nails, bolts, screws, dowels.  Learning outcome:  After completing the course, students will be able to calculate structural parts in steel and wood, and have received an introduction to the design and calculation of wood and steel connections. Students will learn to understand the theory of how steel and wood works in structural system. Students will understand how to use the rules of the euro codes for dimensioning structures so that they meet the requirements in ultimate limit State (ULS) and Service Limited State (SLS). Students will become familiar with the content of:¿ Eurocode 0 NS-EN1990-1-1 Basis of structural design,¿ Eurocode 3 EN 1993-1-1 Design of steel structures and NS-EN1993-1-8 Design of joints¿ Eurocode 5 NS-EN1995-1-1 Design of timber structuresStudents should understand the importance of proper engineering of load-bearing structures and connections of structural parts for safety, function, reliability, aesthetics and economics (material and time consumption by the construction, durability / maintenance). Course responsible:  Einar Nathan   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  Spring parallel   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2015-2016

Course Title: TBA223 Construction - Concrete Course contents:  Course main content is structural engineering.Concrete as construction material, reinforcement, dimensioning of short columns, sizing of beams and plates, pressure reinforcement of beams, T-sections, shear reinforcement in beams, torque and axial force, MN diagram of column cross section. Calculation of deflection, crack width, shrinkage and creep, minimum reinforcement, reinforcement rules (location of reinforcement and concrete cover requirements), anchoring of reinforcement. Introduction to prestressed elements.  Learning outcome:  After completing the course, students will be able to calculate structural parts in concrete. Students will also have received an introduction to the design of prefabricated concrete and prestressed concrete. Students will learn to understand the theory of how concrete works in structural system. Students should understand how to use the rules of the Europen Standard for dimensioning structures so that they meet the requirements for Ultimate Limited State (ULT) and Service Limited State (SLS) . Students will become familiar with the content of the eurokode2 NS EN1992-1-1 Design of concrete structures and use this to calculate the structures. Students should understand the importance of proper sizing and joining of structural parts for safety, function, reliability, aesthetics and economics (material and time consumption by the construction, durability / maintenance). Course responsible:  Einar Nathan   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  Autumn parallel   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2015-2016

Course Title: TBA224 Structural Design of Buildings II Course contents:  Statically indeterminate structures. Description of loads and load cases on building structures. Calculations of snow and wind loads on buildings according to Eurocodes. Earthquake loads. Combination of loads. Design of steel structural elements in carrying lateral and gravity loads. Design of steel trusses, purlins, beams and columns. Buckling of steel members. Beam- column method. Design of a single storey building using hand calculations. Design of bolted and welded steel connections. Bracing of buildings. Sustainable structural design solutions.   Learning outcome:  The course will provide an understanding of how the complete load-carrying structure responds to lateral and vertical loads, and the student should have acquired the knowledge required for the structural design of buildings with basic configuration. Course responsible:  Themistoklis Tsalkatidis   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  Spring parallel   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2015-2016

Course Title: TBA270 Construction Management Course contents:  The course includes Norwegian building laws and regulations. Procedures, project planning and project management is essential themes. Choise of contractor, project documents and specification of mass calculations, estimation of costs, tender control/estimation, contract development and negotiation will be taught. Facilities Management (FM) will also be a subject. Training based on IT-related tools/aids, including BIM (Building Information Modelling), will be introduced.  Learning outcome:  The students should have basic knowledge about projecting and completing constructions through traditional technical construction projecting and total projecting. Course responsible:  Leif Daniel Houck   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2003-2004

Course Title: TBA270B Construction Management Course contents:  The course includes Norwegian building laws and regulations. Procedures, project planning and project management is essential themes. Choise of contractor, project documents and specification of mass calculations, estimation of costs, tender control/estimation, contract development and negotiation will be taught. Facilities Management (FM) will also be a subject. Training based on IT-related tools/aids, including BIM (Building Information Modelling), will be introduced.  Learning outcome:  The students should have basic knowledge about projecting and completing constructions through traditional technical construction projecting and total projecting. Course responsible:  Leif Daniel Houck   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2003-2004

Course Title: TBA310 Building Design III Course contents:  The course consists of a project part and a theoretical part. The theoretical part elaborates on topics from previous planning courses, for instance function analysis, design, construction analysis, etc and supplementary lectures will be given on topics such as typology, environment, colour use, building conservation, universal design, detail design and similar topics depending on the nature of the project assignment. The theory part will be highly integrated into the project part. In the project part, the student carries out the architectural planning of a building construction of closely defined dimensions. The functional, aesthetically and technical specifications are analysed and held together. The project part is carried out under guidance and is based on registrations made in the field. A written account, drawings and a model are produced.  Learning outcome:  The goal is for the students to be able to judge syntheses and handle the main challenge of creating good buildings and building environments where the different aspects function, aesthetics, building techniques and economy have been given a balanced judgement in the form of drawings and descriptions. Course responsible:  Martin Ebert   Teachers:  Einar Bjarki Malmquist, Eva Gabrielle Héléne Bergh, Tormod Aurlien, Leif Daniel Houck   ECTS credits:  15   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2003-2004

Course Title: TBA320 Structural Design of Buildings, Advanced Course Course contents:  Principle of structural dynamic for single-degree of freedom (SDOF) and multi-degree of freedom (MDOF) systems. Introduction concepts on seismic design and earthquake engineering.  Learning outcome:  Upon course completion, the students should be able to perform structural analysis and engineering design of complex buildings to withstand a variety of loads and loading combinations at a specified reliability level. Furthermore, the student should learn to adapt structural solutions to certain design assignment. The course covers constructions using the 2D-elasticity theory and the students are trained in using FEM-software in the design of building frames (timber, steel and reinforced concrete). Reliability and safety considerations are adapted in compliance with building codes and applicable requirements in general. Course responsible:  Ebenezer Ussher   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring semester. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring semester.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2022-2023

Course Title: TBA320 Structural Design of Buildings, Advanced Course Course contents:  Principle of structural dynamic for single-degree of freedom (SDOF) and multi-degree of freedom (MDOF) systems. Introduction concepts on seismic design and earthquake engineering.  Learning outcome:  Upon course completion, the students should be able to perform structural analysis and engineering design of complex buildings to withstand a variety of loads and loading combinations at a specified reliability level. Furthermore, the student should learn to adapt structural solutions to certain design assignment. The course covers constructions using the 2D-elasticity theory and the students are trained in using FEM-software in the design of building frames (timber, steel and reinforced concrete). Reliability and safety considerations are adapted in compliance with building codes and applicable requirements in general. Course responsible:  Ebenezer Ussher   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring semester. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring semester.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2022-2023

Course Title: TBA331 Building Performance Simulation Course contents:  Simulation of building performance, energy use and heat and moisture. Project report.  Learning outcome:  The students will be familiar with the use of energy simulation tools and use such tools for optimising energy use and cost effectiveness in buildings. Also heat and moisture (HAM) simulation will be performed. Course responsible:  Iver Frimannslund   Teachers:  Arnkell Jonas Petersen, Tormod Aurlien, Thomas Kringlebotn Thiis   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  -   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  annually   First time:  Study year 2020-2021   Preferential right:  M-BA

Course Title: TBA390 Timber Engineering Course contents:  The main contents of the course are advanced structural engineering including truss systems, plates, shell structures, as well as advanced themes in timber engineering. Education and training is provided in FEM analysis using current software. The course includes reliability analysis in ultimate and serviceability limit states of existing buildings that is the topic of a project assignment.  Learning outcome:  After completing the course, the student should be able to design complex structures to a specified level of reliability for relevant loads. The student should learn to adapt engineering designs to functional and aesthetic requirements. The course will provide knowledge about structures that need 2D elasticity theory, and knowledge and training in using FEM software for analysis and design of different structural systems. Knowledge and skills are achieved through extensive work on exercises under teacher guidance. Education and training is given in the use of FEM software for structures composed of axially loaded bars of different materials and for slabs of reinforced concrete. Reliability design will be used so that performance and costs are optimized from the perspective of the client and/or community. Course responsible:  Roberto Tomasi, Ebenezer Ussher   Teachers:  Ebenezer Ussher   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  Spring parallel   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2015-2016

Course Title: TBM120 Mechanics of Materials and Structural Engineering Basics Course contents:  Stresses: Normal- (compression/tension), bending-, shear- and torsional stress. Free body diagrams. Modulus of elasticity. Poisson's ratio. Material properties of steel. Stress-strain diagram of steel. Factors of safety (load- and material factors). Stress concentration ("notch"). Temperature stresses. Temperature expansion coefficient of various materials.  Force- and moment-diagrams. Introduction to the unit load method, i.e. the theory and developement of beam- and truss deflection formulas. Buckling (radius of gyration, Euler column, real column, buckling length, slenderness ratio). Computation of bending- and shear stresses at any chosen point of a beam section.  Learning outcome:  The students should upon completion have an understanding of: Linear forces and moments (including torsion), stresses, equilibrium of bodies (free body diagrams), deformation, strength of materials, elasticity, column buckling. The students should be able to compute the first moment of an area, the moment of inertia and the section modulus, draw shear- and moment-diagrams for beams, be able to apply the unit load method for beam and truss deflection computations and statically indeterminate beam reactions and statically indeterminate truss member forces, be able to develop stress formulas and know how to apply those formulas. Course responsible:  Themistoklis Tsalkatidis, Emrah Erduran   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  -   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2006-2007

Course Title: TBM200 Materials Science and Engineering Course contents:  The course will consist of video lectures, 2 hours of interactive lectures, 2 hours of exercises, plus 2 hours of laboratory sessions per week. Key content of the course is atomic bonding, crystal structure, phase diagrams, phase transitions, the microstructure of materials, metallography, deformation and failure, thermomechanical treatment of materials, metals, ceramics, polymers, and composites. Aspects of material selection and other material properties will also be discussed.   Learning outcome:  The properties of materials depend on their chemical composition and structure. The goal of the course is to provide students fundamental knowledge on material and their properties so that they will be able to orient themselves in further literature on the structure and properties of specific materials, including strength and utilization. The students should have gained insight into the connection between composition and structure and their properties and usage areas. Furthermore, the students will have gained knowledge on standard material testing methods for composition and strength. Course responsible:  Kristian Berland   Teachers:  Elin Dypvik Sødahl, Øyvind Emil Hansen, Henrik Folke Holmberg, Gunnar Torp   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  108 (additional students is acceptable if the lab is previously approved).    Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2005-2006   Preferential right:  Ranking:1.            students who have the course as mandatory in their study plan2.            students with most ECTS creditsIt there is not enough slots in group one the students will be ranked by their ECTS credits.Students who are joining the course for the first time have priority on the lab.

Course Title: TBM250 The Finite Element Method Course contents:  Central topics are: Terminology, direct method for element matrices, compatibility, equilibrium, system matrices and boundary conditions. Galerkin method and interpolation functions. Derivation of structural dynamics matrices for beam elements. Solution algorithms. Solution of simple problems by hand and programming. Use of commercial software packages. Beam elements, plate/shell elements and volume elements. Boundary conditions and symmetry. Convergence criteria. Sources of errors and singularities. A number of compulsory problems must be solved in order to pass the course.  Learning outcome:  Having passed the course, the students will have gained basic understanding of how to use the Finite-Element-Method (FEM) in solving practical problems. This class also provides training in problem solving using commercial FEM- software packages. Course responsible:  Tor Anders Nygaard   Teachers:  Marit Irene Kvittem   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the August block. This course has teaching/evaluation in August block and the Autumn parallel   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2008-2009

Course Title: TEL100 Electronic Prototyping Course contents:  In this course, students will get a practical approach to the digital tools of the future. This course consists of 2 parts:Part 1 lasts one week, Part 2 lasts for two weeks, with a final project.Part 1: consists of basic introduction to logic programming using the Open Source microcontroller Arduino which is an electronic prototype platform. The programming language that is used and taught is C programming language. Students will get a basic introduction to this. In addition, students will be introduced to IoT (Internet of Things) in the form of the "Particle" or the "Arduino MKR" platform. Part 2: students will choose a three different specializations that they will use in the project task. Tuition is therefore divided into 3 groups according to this point. The different specializations require different prerequisites.The three specializations are:Embedded systemsStudents learn to program microcontrollers at a more basic level by means of C programming language This part will not be based on Arduino, but a microprocessor in class "ARM Cortex-M". There will also be taught the principle of real time processes, and workshops on the themes. The aim of this subject is documentation of work done in the course in the form of a design report which addresses a topic within the chosen topic that documents how students have used the coding to solve the assignment.IoT: The Internet of Things (IoT) is a rapid growing industry, and it is becoming increasingly important for professionals to understand what it is, how it works, and how to use its power to improve your business. This course will provide practical experience with programming that will help students to explore and interact with IoT, which is the bridge between cyber and physical worlds. We will look at IoT sensors, actuators and communication modules that connect equipment to the internet, as well as electronics and systems, both of which support how the Internet of things work and what it is designed to do.In this part of the course you will be able to Identify the sensors and other devices needed for different IoT solutions. Basic electronic design used on IoT sensors and built-in controls as well as understanding and mapping an IoT system containing specific devices.Autonomous systems (advanced embedded systems):In this module, students will get a introduction to Linux OS and the Nvidia Jetson platform. The overall goal is to kickstart the learning of AI, machine learning, deep learning in addition to sensor technologies such as LIDAR and MEMS. The aim of this module is to carry out a project within the topic of Inteligent Transport Systems (ITS) which is documented in a design report.Through the project assignment, students will have the opportunity to work on developing sustainable solutions related to global needs.  Learning outcome:  After completing the course the student should know the basic structure and function ofComponents in electronics (transistors, motor controls, control units etc).Practical programming in terms basic knowledge about C programming. How use of IoTPrototyping of microcontrollers such as Arduino. For the students that chooses autonomous systems they will get a overview of the following conceptsBasic understanding of the applications of AI, machine learning, deep learning, Linux in addition to sensor technologies such as LIDAR and MEMS.Real Time ProcessesIntroduction of relevant electronic tools such as  "NViDIA Jetson" In addition one will also experience practical project work.develop your communications skills learn how to write a designreport Course responsible:  Odd Ivar Lekang   Teachers:  Kristian Sørby Omberg   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in august. This course has teaching/evaluation in August.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2016-2017

Course Title: TEL200 Introduction to robotics Course contents:  Introduction and history - serial and parallel manipulators. Mobile robots.Rigid body motion - Rigid body transformations, homogeneous transformations. Rotations in the Euclidean space. Rotation matrices and Euler angles. Transformations in the Euclidean space. Differential kinematics, velocity representations and Jacobians.Kinematics - forward and inverse kinematics. Manipulator Jacobian and workspaces. Joint space and operational space representations.Redundant and parallel manipulators. Holonomic and non-holonomic systems.Dynamics - inertial properties of rigid bodies. Dynamic equations of single body and multibody motion.Navigation, localization and mapping (SLAM). Sensors and perception. Robot vision. Machine learning in robotics.  Learning outcome:  The students will get an introduction and peek into the magic world of Robotics and have acquired knowledge about, and skills in, design, analysis and the application of robots. This includes the combination av practical work and programming, with mathematical modelling of serial, parallel and mobile robots. The students should also have basic knowledge about, and skills in, applying the most used methods for robot vision and machine learning for different applications within robotics. Course responsible:  Alireza David Anisi   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN, NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2020-2021   Preferential right:  Applied robotics

Course Title: TEL211 Robot programming Course contents:  The course covers selected methods and frameworks for developing software for robots. The student will learn how to create Python programs for robots and get familiarized with common sensors and actuators. The course provides an introduction to the use of command line interface for Linux-based systems, and to ROS (Robot Operating System), a software development kit commonly used in robot software development. In addition to programming robots using Python, students will receive a brief introduction to how robots can be programmed via "teach pendant"; a handheld device commonly used in industry.  Learning outcome:  The student should be familiar with common methods and frameworks for programming robots. The student should have basic knowledge about Linux-based systems and should be capable of developing robot software based on ROS and Python. The student should also be familiar with how robots are programmed in industry and have basic knowledge about selected sensors and actuators commonly used in robotics. Course responsible:  Lars Grimstad   Teachers:  Fetullah Atas, Weria Khaksar   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN, NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  25   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the spring parallel. This course has teaching and evaluation during the spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Yearly   First time:  Study year 2021-2022   Preferential right:  M-RB

Course Title: TEL240 Control Engineering and Automation Course contents:  Dynamic systems: Mathematical modeling with differential equations, state space models and transfer functions. Process dynamics. Stability analysis. Frequency response analysis. Programming of simulators for dynamic systems.Control: Motivation for control. Feedback control with PID controller. Documentation of control systems with block diagrams and piping and instrumentation diagrams. Components in the control loop, including industrial automation equipment, actuators and sensors. PID controller tuning. Feedforward control. Cascade control. Ratio control. Stabilizing control of process plants. Factors affecting the stability of a control loop. Stability margins. State estimation with Kalman Filter. Model-based control with Inverse Dynamics Control, Linear Quadratic (LQ) control and Model-predictive Control (MPC). Logical and sequential control. PLC systems (programmable logic control). Programming of simulators for control systems.Software: Python and OpenModelica in the theoretical parts of the course, and LabVIEW and Matlab in laboratory assignments.  Learning outcome:  Students should have acquired knowledge about and skills in applying systems theory to dynamical systems, different models for representation, calculation of time responses and analysis of dynamics. The students should also have knowledge about and skills in applying the most used methods for analysis and design of control systems, including the choice of a controller and choosing control parameters. Furthermore the students should have gained key knowledge about methods and be skilled in the use of computers and automated systems for controlling physical processes. Students will have gained an understanding of the many reasons for choosing automated processes as an alternative to the use of manual labour force. Course responsible:  Finn Aakre Haugen, Antonio Candea Leite   Teachers:  Lars Grimstad   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching and evaluation in Spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2008-2009

Course Title: TEL280 Mobile robots and navigation Course contents:  The course teaches autonomous navigation for mobile robots. Topics include localization, path planning, motion planning, and SLAM (Simultaneous Localization and Mapping). Students will use Python and ROS (Robot Operating System) when working on autonomous navigation in simulation and on real robots. In addition to learning basic concepts, the students will also be introduced to experimental and state-of-the-art navigation systems.  Learning outcome:  The student should be familiar with basic concepts related to autonomous navigation, and they should be able to apply what they have learned on real robot systems. Course responsible:  Weria Khaksar   Teachers:  Fetullah Atas   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  25   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the autumn parallel. This course has teaching and evaluation during the autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Yearly   First time:  Study year 2022-2023

Course Title: THT100 Civil Engineering Course contents:  The course consists mainly of lectures on management, planning and operation of public infratstructure. Basic principles for design and construction of roads, water supply and drainage systems, local stormwater management to prevent flooding, use of stormwater as a resource, as well as basic principles in solid waste management.  In addition, principles for localization of houses  adapted to landscape and local climate is covered, as well as fire protection/-fighting and universal design.  Learning outcome:  The students are to acquire knowledge regarding municipal organisation, as well as planning, construction and operation of municipal technical systems, like buildings, road systems, water and wastewater systems, waste handling and recycling. Course responsible:  Ulf Rydningen   Teachers:  John Morken, Thomas Kringlebotn Thiis, Harsha Chandima Ratnaweera, Petter Hieronymus Heyerdahl, Arve Heistad   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in January block. This course has teaching/evaluation in January block, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2005-2006

Course Title: THT200 Water Engineering for Landscape Planners Course contents:  Hydraulics. Irrigation techniques for park- and green areas. Draining techniques. Risk of erosion and methods for protection. Geomechanics. Groundwater. Sustainable urban drainage and storm water management. Urban hydrology. Conventional versus sustainable handling of storm water, storm water runoff in cities, storm water pollution, infiltration, dimensioning, equipment for and management of dams, open water ways and canals for storm water runoff.  Learning outcome:  Upon completion the students shall have knowledge of the management of water in urban and green areas. They shall be able to use practical methods for planning and dimensioning solutions for management of water. Course responsible:  Ulf Rydningen   Teachers:  Arve Heistad, Kim Aleksander Haukeland Paus   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2008-2009

Course Title: THT201 Rapid Methods for Assessing Environmental Parameters, Laboratory Course Course contents:  The course focuses on rapid methods for measuring important environmental parameters. Rapid analysis is an important tool when relatively accurate results are needed in a minimum of time and without involving larger and specialised laboratory equipment and expertise. Emphasis is on methods for measuring dissolved gasses and chemical content, such as nitrogen, phosphorus, pH, COD, BOD, content of particles, colour and turbidity, content of micro-organisms. Characterisation of sludge will also be included, the same with JAR-test to evaluate settling chemicals. Evaluation of measuring methods with regard to application, the margin of error, necessary amount of samples etc. will also be included. The laboratory exercises will be in the  water lab and in the  aqua lab at the University.  Learning outcome:  The students should acquire knowledge of and master relevant methods for rapid measuring of important environmental parameters, primarily in connection with water and sludge. Furthermore they will be able to describe, plan and carry out sampling methods and evaluate analysis results. Course responsible:  Odd Ivar Lekang   Teachers:  Sven Andreas Högfeldt, Lena Oksdøl Foseid, Harsha Chandima Ratnaweera, Kristoffer Larsen Kvame   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in spring parallell. This course has teaching/evaluation in spring parallell.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2013-2014

Course Title: THT261 Water Supply, Sewerage and Drainage Course contents:  Plans and design of systems for water supply, drainage and wastewater. Precipitation and surface water, urban hydrology and flood estimations. Transport network for water supply and waste water with their components, water demand, discharge of wastewater, ground water for water supply and well drilling. Renewal and rehabilitation of transport network and protection against pollution of water sources.  Learning outcome:  The students will be able to address the following phases in the water supply and waste water treatment projects: idea, planning, dimensioning, rehabilitation and sanitation of older installations. The students will learn planning and dimensioning of infrastructure elements for water and waste water. These are transport network, transport systems, pumps and other related equipment for water supply and municipal waste water. Course responsible:  Ulf Rydningen   Teachers:  Arve Heistad   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2013-2014

Course Title: THT271 Basics of water and wastewater treatment technology Course contents:  This course focuses on technologies that deploy water and wastewater treatment processes at utilities.Students will learn about processes and technologies for designing and upgrading water and wastewater treatment plants. The capstone assignment is to design water and wastewater treatment plants upgrades based on two respective case studies.The goal of this course is to enable studentsto justify the selection of processes andto propose technologies of water and wastewater treatment for design and upgrade of treatment plants.Knowledge of processes used for water and wastewater treatment and the ability to propose respective technologies will be the basis for evaluating student performance in the course.The course is arranged in 5 modules:Module 1 introduces global water challenges and sets the context for the following modules. It positions the water crisis on the global risks landscape and reveals interconnections. It develops skills of PESTL analysis: political, economic, technological, legal, and environmental factors of the water crisis. It also introduces solution agendas on digital water, water and sanitation services, cities & basins of the future. Students will experience conflicts of resource efficiency in the water-food-energy nexus playing SIM4NEXUS serious game. The module introduces water supply and wastewater management practices in Europe. The module also develops skills of problem and stakeholder analysis in expert groups.Module 2 focuses on physical, chemical, and biological quality of drinking water and the characteristics of wastewater. It also refreshes knowledge on chemical reactions and reactor analysis. It prepares students for understanding treatment processes in Module 3.Module 3 introduces processes used in water and wastewater treatment technologies that are a subject in the following modules. Module 3 builds the knowledge of physical, chemical, physical-chemical, and biological processes. It also develops skills in process analysis in water and wastewater treatment. It introduces a case study development practice - an in-depth, detailed examination of two cases on water and wastewater within a real-world context of treatment plants.Module 4 introduces water treatment technologies used in the drinking water supply. It builds knowledge on how to deploy processes learned from Module 3 in technologies that achieve treatment goals of waterworks: remove particles, natural organic matter, dissolved solids, disinfect water, treat residuals. It develops skills in planning technological upgrades at water treatment plants and selecting control and automation strategies. It introduces the practice of case study development with a technology upgrade.Module 5 introduces technologies used in wastewater treatment. It builds knowledge on how to deploy processes learned from Module 3 in technologies that achieve treatment goals of wastewater plants: remove particles and phosphates, organic matter and nutrients, recycle and reuse water, process biosolids and sludges. It develops skills in planning technological upgrades at wastewater treatment plants. It introduces the practice of case study development with a technology upgrade.  Learning outcome:  At the end of this course, students will know:global context and status of the water sectoressential water quality indicators and wastewater characteristicscommon physical, chemical, physical-chemical, and biological processes applied in the water sectorexamples of water and wastewater treatment technologiesand will be able tocharacterise the source water quality and wastewater characteristics and define treated water quality goals and standardsperform predesign studies, including process selection and development of design criteriapropose design alternatives for the selected processes Course responsible:  Zakhar Maletskyi   Teachers:  Nazli Pelin Kocatürk Schumacher, Agnieszka Katarzyna Cuprys, Lars John Hem, Harsha Chandima Ratnaweera   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2005-2006

Course Title: THT280 On-Site Wastewater Systems Course contents:  Introduction to on-site systems for treatment of wastewater, source separated grey- and blackwater, stormwater in cities. Describing treatment processes and effects of discharges to water recipients. Health aspects in relation to treatment of wastewater, transport and inactivation of paracites, bacteria and viruses treatment filters, soil and groundwater. Source separating wastewater systems in combination with urban agricuture and park areas.  Introduction to quantitative health risk assessment.   Learning outcome:  The students shall have an overview of on-site systems for wastewater treatment and reuse, understand how to utilize natural processes in wastewater treatment. Students should be able to identify and explain important parameters used for design and choice of treatment systems in a local context. Should be able to do a complete design of an on-site treatment system and understand how to design systems for optimal resource recovery. Are able to evaluate the impact from wastewater discharges on health and environment. Course responsible:  Arve Heistad   Teachers:  Nazli Pelin Kocatürk Schumacher, Vegard Nilsen   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel an june..   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2022-2023

Course Title: THT291 Resource recovery from waste and circular economy Course contents:  This course provides the fundamental processes and technologies for valorization of organic wastes to energy and material products via biotechnological and physicochemical processes. Processes and concepts for resource recovery from wastes, recycling and reuse of waste and bioproducts are discussed towards the perspectives of circular economy.  Learning outcome:  The students will gain an overview on the spectrum of processes available for resource recovery from organic waste and waste biorefineries. Students who successfully pass this course will gain knowledge and competence on the following subjects:Principles and understanding of waste biorefinery concept and organic waste treatment processesSelection of suitable technologies for energy and material production from wasteCritical evaluations of organic wastes and sustainability within the circular economyThe course will focus on topics addressing SDG 6 , 7, 11, 12, 13. Course responsible:  John Morken, Nazli Pelin Kocatürk Schumacher   Teachers:  John Morken   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Yearly   First time:  Study year 2020-2021

Course Title: THT300 Planning and design of urban water systems Course contents:  The course includes methods for planning and designing urban systems for water, sewage, stormwater and streams. The course is divided into four sections:Discharge models: Precipitation-drainage models, precipitation statistics, frequency analyzes, climate change, terrain analyzes, infiltration and other hydrologic processes, flood assessments, calibration and validation of models. Relevant analysis tools: SCALGO Live, SWMM, DDDUrban, NEVINA and PQRUT.Urban drainage systems: The three-step strategy, laws, regulations, planning, discharge regulation and diversion, individual measures and complex systems, nature-based solutions, sources, spread and removal of pollution, climate adaptation and sustainability. Relevant analysis tools: SWMM.Open channel flow: Flow situations, water-surface calculations, channel design, assessment of erosion risk and critical rock size, reopening of closed watercourses and culvert hydraulics. Relevant analysis tools: HEC-RAS 1D, HEC-RAS 2D, HY-8.Water supply: Pipe hydraulics, water quality changes in the pipe network, planning, design and modeling of drinking water networks. Relevant analysis tools: EPANETCompulsory assignments related to the course will give students a good introduction to the mentioned analysis tool.  Learning outcome:  1. Discharge modelsThe candidate:Has a good understanding of rain-drainage modeling and field processes.Can process datasets for observations and knows the principles of frequency analysis.Can calculate discharge using several models and evaluate results against the necessary input data, assumptions and uncertainty.Knows principles for how models can be calibrated and validated.2. Urban drainage systemsThe candidate:Can identify requirements and propose, assess and design solutions that meet requirements.Can design separate measures and complex drainage systems for different steps in the three-step strategy and identify bottlenecks and weaknesses in such systems.Has an understanding of how cost-benefit assessment can be carried out and how sustainability can be promoted in projects.Has knowledge of water quality in stormwater and can account for sources, spreading mechanisms and removal processes of pollution.3. Channel flowThe candidate:Has a good understanding of concepts and terms within channel flow.Can use manual methods and analysis tools to calculate water lines for both rapid and gradually varying flow, knows the assumptions of such methods and can use the knowledge to assess and design channels.Knows different methods for calculating critical rock size and can use these to assess the risk of erosion.Has knowledge of flow types in culverts and can use analysis tools to assess hydraulic capacity and culvert design.4. Water supplyThe candidate:Has a good understanding of pipe hydraulics and can calculate hydraulics in non-circular cross-sections, pipe in series, pipes in parallel and friction losses using different methods.Has knowledge of flow in the drinking water network and can carry out manual calculations and analyzes for simple networks.Knows the main principles of network modeling and can use analysis tools to assess and design complex networks based on functional requirements.Has knowledge of water quality changes in the drinking water network. Course responsible:  Kim Aleksander Haukeland Paus   ECTS credits:  15   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in the autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in the autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2003-2004

Course Title: THT310 Advanced water and wastewater treatment engineering Course contents:  This course prepares candidates to practice the knowledge of water and wastewater treatment technologies in the conceptual design and dimensioning of unit processes. Based on THT 271 and THT280, this course provides breadth and depth of knowledge and conceptual skills that allow graduates to function as designers. This course has a substantial part in engineering calculations. The course will address both water and wastewater treatment.Technologies (examples):FiltrationSedimentationCoagulation and flocculationMembrane separationDisinfectionBiogas productionApplications (examples)Design of treatment facilitiesUpgrading of treatment facilitiesResources recovery and reuseProcess surveillanceProcess optimisation and controlDigitalisation of the utilitiesIn this course, you will be working on designing treatment processes and technological units. You will be able to follow-up case-studies, for example, developed in the course assignment for THT 271.  Learning outcome:  At the completion of this course, candidates will be able to:recognise the design principles of water and wastewater treatment technologiesexplain the physical and chemical basis of water and wastewater treatment processes and technological equipmentidentify calculation principles of technological equipmentperform basic design calculations of water and wastewater treatment processes and equipmentanalyse water and wastewater treatment flowsheetscategorise water and wastewater treatment equipmentcritique water and wastewater treatment technologiesdesign water and wastewater treatment technologies and equipment Course responsible:  Harsha Chandima Ratnaweera   Teachers:  Nazli Pelin Kocatürk Schumacher, Arve Heistad, Vegard Nilsen, John Morken, Zakhar Maletskyi   ECTS credits:  15   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2009-2010

Course Title: THT311 Water & Wastewater Treatment (special topics)  Course contents:  This course is an intensive course complimentary to THT 271, THT 310 or can be taken as an independent professional development course.This course focuses on thematic modules addressing modern water and wastewater management. Relevant topics will be selected for the current study year from the below list:Water quality management and monitoringClimate Change influence on water supply and wastewater managementAdvanced treatment processes in water and wastewater treatmentDigitalisation of the water sectorCybersecurity in the water sectorWater-smart circular economyDecentralised wastewater treatmentEnergy considerations in the water sectorBeneficial use of residualsResearch skills for the water sectorCourse assignments will focus on the implementation of one or more special topics in water utility upgrading.  Learning outcome:  At the completion of this course, candidates will be able to (examples, depending on the topics selected for this year):apply  principles of the integrated water resource managementrecognise climate change impacts on the water sectordescribe applications of nanotechnology in water and wastewater treatmentexplain the principles of digitalisation in the water sectoridentify cybersecurity risks in the water sectorimplement circular economy principles in the water sectorcompare decentralised and centralised wastewater treatment solutionsformulate water, resource and energy value chainsevaluate water reuse opportunitiesdevelop research concepts and present results Course responsible:  Harsha Chandima Ratnaweera   Teachers:  Nazli Pelin Kocatürk Schumacher, Arve Heistad, John Morken, Lars John Hem, Zakhar Maletskyi   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  60   Teaching exam periods:  2 weeks of intensive lectures (daily) between mid June-mid July, Self-study work on the term paper July-August.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2012-2013   Preferential right:  Ranking:1.            students who have the course as mandatory in their study plan2.            students on the following study programmes: M-VM and M-IØ3.            students with most ECTS creditsIt there are not enough slots in group one the students will be ranked by their ECTS credits.

Course Title: THT313 Water Management in Cold Climate Course contents:  BackgroundCold and temperate climates have special challenges when it comes to the management of water, water supply and wastewater treatment. Some of the most pristine environments are located in colder climates and the pollution of water by emerging contaminents, in addition to the nutrients, is an increasing challenge. Most treatment processes are temperature dependent, requiring additional volume and time due to the slowing down of conventional processes at lower temperatures. Water distribution and sewer systems need special care to minimise operational problems during winters and snow melting periods. Climate change often negatively impacts these conditions further.  Course contents:Lectures on: Water quality status, Water resources management, Water treatment, Wastewater treatment related to Cold Climates - including arctic and tempered climates, and impact of climate change.Project report/scientific writing.Excursions: to water and wastewater treatment plants focusing on challenges and solution in cold climates.    Learning outcome:  Knowledge: students will have an extended understanding of cold climate conditions related  pollution states and management, treatment and operational aspects of treatment systems.Professional skills: Students shall be able to make conceptual designs for water supply and wastewater treatment systems addressing the challenges in cold climates. They shall be able to carry out a literature review using modern scientific databases and the internet and to prepare a well-structured project report.General competence: students shall have an extended understanding of the pollution trends in cold climates and specialised techniques to manage challenges related to water supply and wastewater treatment processes. They will be able to identify the advantages/weaknesses in current systems and propose improvements based on modern practices. Course responsible:  Harsha Chandima Ratnaweera   Teachers:  Susann Andersen, Lars John Hem, Roland Peter Kallenborn   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  80   Teaching exam periods:  The course starts in June block and ends in the August block.   Course frequency:  Anually, lectures in June, Project report submission in August.   First time:  Study year 2022-2023   Preferential right:  M-VM

Course Title: THT320 Environmental Analysis Course contents:  The course will focus on the method for conducting life cycle assessment (LCA) of relevant products, where students will learn to practice all the main elements of the method as described in the textbook and ISO standards. The focus will also be on application to identify how environmental and resource information can be used for strategic development in companies, for product improvement and for marketing.  Learning outcome:  Knowledge objectives:Students will acquire basic knowledge about conducting analyzes of man-made environmental challenges, with a focus on life cycle analyses (LCA).Students shall have the knowledge of how environmental analyses are used by companies and authorities.Skill objectives:Students will acquire basic skills in calculating environmental and resource impacts related to processes and products. Students will receive a basic introduction to the method for life cycle assessment and environmental declaration of products and services. Course responsible:  John Morken   Teachers:  Ellen Soldal, Lars Gunnar Furelid Tellnes   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN, NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2015-2016

Course Title: TIN100 Digital Manufacturing and Design Technology 1 Course contents:  In TIN-160, students will get a practical insight into colloaboration in a project, an overview of modern prototype technique and introduction to subjets such as Internet of Things, Robotics, Data Analysis and Artificial Intelligence in custom modules. These modules are the pathway which will form the basis for project work where students will have the opportunity to work on developing sustainable solutions related to primary needs eg. water safety, Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS), sustainable food and energy production.Students will learn about the process of developing an idea through a practical approach to a problem based in a need. This development will take place with an external partner.Design Projects will be team based where the focus is on planning the implementation an assigned project, but also create a dynamic collaboration within the group. Digital tools such as the CAD (Computer Aided Design) program "Autodesk Fusion 360"  will also be introduced at the start of the course. As a supplement will be an intensive course report writing to be used to document the group's process to develop their idea. The aim of this subject is documentation of work done in the course in the form of a design report or a feasability study.   Learning outcome:  Introduction to modern CAD tool ( "Autodesk Fusion 360")Introduction to selected topics.Introduction to relevant digitale tools such as Autodesk Fusion 360.Practical teamwork Increased communication ability and documentation of projects.The goal of the project work is to provide the students with experience in solving real-life problems.  Course responsible:  Odd Ivar Lekang   Teachers:  Kristian Sørby Omberg   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in januay block.    Course frequency:  Yearly   First time:  Study year 2020-2021

Course Title: TIN200 Digital Manufacturing and Design Technology Course contents:  In the course TiN260: Digital Manufacturing and Design Technology "Applied Methods and Processes so students will be informed of the change taking place, worldwide, in terms of how products are designed and manufactured. This transformation takes place through digital production and design (DM & D) - a transition from paper-based processes to digital processes in industry. By the end of this course, you will understand what DMD is and how it affects careers, procedures and processes in companies both large and small. Students will be involved in creating a roadmap to achieve their own personal goals related to digital production and design, which will help them to see opportunities in the current labor market. In this course, students also students have the opportunity to use the knowledge acquired in previous subjects in the implementation of an assigned project. The implementation of the project provides a concrete contribution to the students' work experience and will demonstrate their knowledge of the industry 4. where students will have the opportunity to develop sustainable solutions used for solving the primary needs such as an water technology, intelligent transport systems (ITS), sustainable food and energy production.The aim of this subject is simple documentation of development work done in the course  in the form of a design report or a feasability study.   Learning outcome:  Use of Digital production and design technology Advance use of the CAD tool ( "Autodesk Fusion 360")Applied use of such rapid prototyping, programming, IoT etc in projectspractical cooperationProject completion Increased communication ability and documentation of projects.  Preliminary development of a "Digital Twin" system Course responsible:  Odd Ivar Lekang   Teachers:  Kristian Sørby Omberg   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in  juneblock. This course has teaching/evaluation in June block.   Course frequency:  Every year in the juneblock.    First time:  Study year 2020-2021

Course Title: TIN300 Digital Manufacturing and Design Technology 3  (Specialization) Course contents:  In this topic students will apply the knowledge they have gained through previous courses in manufacturing and design. The challenge in this course is that they will be working with all systems where digital new technologies and designs are included, going from single product to system thinking. The work in this course is a project formed with industry partners and the task shall be of a nature similar to real-life projects. The project assignment gives students the opportunity to work to develop sustainable solutions to solve global primary needs related to water, intelligent transport systems (ITS), sustainable food and energy production.It also aims to give the student an overview of how digital advances changing the industrial landscape and opportunities of today's factories including the entire production processes.In the course the students will learn aboutAnalysis of a complex production process and important suksesfaktorer for the use of digital production and design of complex new technologies processesModel-based systems for production and advanced manufacturing enterpriserDevelopment of cyberphysical frameworks - "Digital Twins"Autodesk Fusion 360 will be the platform used in this course.  Learning outcome:  Preform analysis of a complex manufacturing process and consider the important factors to use a digital production and design in a complex processesExplain model-based systems for enterprisesApplied use of such rapid prototyping, programming, IoT etc in projectspractical cooperation and project completion in larger projects  Increased communication ability and documentation of projects.  Development of a "Digital Twin" system Course responsible:  Odd Ivar Lekang   Teachers:  Kristian Sørby Omberg   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN, NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in  autumn   Course frequency:  Yearly   First time:  Study year 2020-2021

Course Title: TIN301 Innovation and Project Verification Course contents:  The course is designed for students who wish to commercialize an idea based on their own work or through collaboration with others (R&D Institutions , Industry, public sector, etc.). The course consists of two modules that together constitute the core components of an commercialization and verification process in order to develop a suistanable solution for global problem. The first part of the subject includes feasibility studies, FTO (Freedom to operate) analyzes, etc. in order to data foundation for further verification. If needed lectures in key subjects within commercialization (business model, IPR, project management, writing and designing applications/project proposls for inital funding) will be provided.The second part of the subject is based on external assessment of the project and the student must submit a written project description (ref: project description NFR student renewal)  together with an oral presentation of the project in front of an panel of experts. As part of this section, individual guidance may be offered to contribute to the design of the project description, pitch training etc.  Learning outcome:  After completing the course, the student will know the most important components of an commercialization process and be able to apply these in order to verify new ideas. Course responsible:  Odd Ivar Lekang   Teachers:  Andreas Svarstad Flø, Kristian Sørby Omberg   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  -   Teaching exam periods:  January   Course frequency:  yearly   First time:  Study year 2020-2021   Preferential right:  Masterstudents in their final year have priority

Course Title: TIP100 Industrial Innovation and Technology Course contents:  The course is based on a project-based approach to learning, where workshop activities and project assignments and other forms of active learning are used. As a supplement to this, it will be possible to organize ordinary lectures to support the learning activities. The lectures may include relevant topics such as the history of innovation, innovation history, creative processes and idea creation, idea descriptions, patenting and pattern protection, product design and prototype development, project organization etc.The workshop-activities (including mandatory hand-ins) are organized so that they will give the students a practical approach to the use of digital tools for design (CAD - Computer Aided Design) and basic equipment for computer controlled modelling and production (3D-printing, Laser cutting etc.). The project assignments consists of two consecutive parts. Part 1: Is focused on concept-verification relative to customer/end-users of a new product, with the aim to verify and establish a "Product market fit". Part 2: This is a "Problem solving project", where the students are to use experiences and knowledge they have acquired during the course to solve a task or a problem. Such tasks may have been suggested by external organizations, industry or be a part of current Research.  Learning outcome:  Through a project-based approach to the syllabus one aims to give the students a practical understanding and training in product development and early concept verification. During exercises and project-work the students will get to know modern production methods for Digital Design and prototyping, using the computer program "Fusion 360" and by Rapid Prototyping (RP) tools. An effect of the project-work is that the students will be able to relate to project planning and collaboration, and writing and presenting project reports and results in a practical manner. Furthermore, they will have insight into and have been trained in the creation of ideas, and how these may be stimulated, cultivated and realized throughout different phases of an innovative process. Students will be able to formulate ideas and project descriptions. The course gives the students an introduction to common problems and procedures connected with the clarification of rights, as well as business-related and moral rules for development and innovation operations. Knowledge of typical challenges and bottlenecks that usually occurs in product development are also important elements in this. Course responsible:  Ola Sørby Omberg   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  Juniblokk   Course frequency:  Annually.   First time:  Study year 2004-2005

Course Title: TIP150 Modern Workshop Technology, Introductory Course Course contents:  The course gives an introduction in the use and function of the most common types of workshop tools and machinery for the development and production of models and prototypes, as well as practical training in a workshop environment with group exercises and supervision from experts. The theoretical/practical part is given in smaller groups for training in the safe use of tools and workshop machines. This period comprises of training in the use of machines for boring, grinding, turning, welding methods for metals and plastics, cohesive methods, sheet metal forming, accuracy, important security aspects of using dangerous machinery etc. After this has been completed the students have to complete a written theoretical test, Having finished the practice period, the students shall develop, design and build a smaller model or prototype on an independent basis, but with tuition when needed. This model/prototype is the last part of the evaluation, along with the project report.  Learning outcome:  Having finished the course, the students will have gained knowledge of the most important tools and workshop machines which are used in the development and production of models and prototypes. Furthermore they will have been trained in practical use of these tools and machines, and security aspects connected with them, as well as having participated actively in the design and production of a simple functional model or prototype. Course responsible:  Øyvind Emil Hansen   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  30   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2010-2011   Preferential right:  Ranking:1.            students who have the course as mandatory in their study plan2.            students on the following study programmes: M-BA, M-RB, M-IØ and M-MPP3.            students with most ECTS creditsIt there are not enough slots in group one the students will be ranked by their ECTS credits.

Course Title: TIP200 Product Development and Product Design with 3D Course contents:  The course consists of 3 parts:Part 1: Introduction to aspects of powerful computer tools in modern product and process development, design and prototyping. Tuition and training in the use of the software-platform Solidworks as an integrated tool for product development and product design, with surface and solid modeling, functional visualization, animation, texture and rendering, light regimes, etc.Part 2: Introduction, tuition and training in the use of special software modules for material and sustainability (Energy consumption, CO2-emissions and recycling), computer aided production (DAP) and specialized tools for analysis (Flow, heat and stress). Selected lectures in topics such as properties of materials, environmental and safety demands, product development methodology and reports.Part 3: Project work with tuition and development of project report with visualization of solutions and results. A guide for making reports is taught and used. The complexity of the project may vary, and are carried out as individual projects or as team work, where several student work together in development and documentation of a product idea or solution to a problem through all steps including 3D visualization and in many cases a small scale RP-model.The project work and project report is the basis for external evaluation and grading as Passed/Not passed.  Learning outcome:  Having finished the course, the students will be able to develop and design products in 3D through all steps leading to a functional concept, including a product animation that can be used for further analysis, the production of a small scale prototype or basic production data for the production of a larger and more complex model. Furthermore they will be able to analyze and predict how the product will behave in a production process and in a consumer market, before it is put into production with regards to materials, environmental impact (Energy consumption, CO2-emissions, recycling etc.), as well as economy and user friendliness etc. Through project work the students shall have learned to work efficiently in teams, and under guidance, as well as contributing and interacting with each other creatively to bring forth a good product design and a good product concept. They shall also have learned to master product development pathways and utilise the design and graphical tools which are an integrated part of advances engineering and design software, in order to develop high quality concept descriptions and project reports. Course responsible:  Henrik Folke Holmberg   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  40   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually.   First time:  Study year 2004-2005   Preferential right:  Ranking:1.            students who have the course as mandatory in their study plan2.            students on the following study programmes: M-MPP, M-RB og M-IØ.3.            students with most ECTS creditsIt there are not enough slots in group one the students will be ranked by their ECTS credits.

Course Title: TIP300 Concept and Product Realization Course contents:  The course consists of three main parts:Part 1: Lectures with advanced topics in modern concept development and product realization. Key words are sustainable product development and industrial ecology, integrated product development (IPD), development- and selection models, functional analysis and specification, steps in the conceptualization process, regimes for screening and external testing, selection criteria, treatment of data and results, quality assurance etc. Furthermore, important standards and aspects of ergonomics and safety, regulations, legal product responsibilities and documentation, modern industrial production systems and methods, guidelines and data for pre-production, cost estimates for prototypes and limited series etc.Part 2: Individual project work, which will be the major part of the workload in the course, with training in time limited development projects, organizing project work, and writing project reports as basis for later master projects. The project work starts by identifying a number of potential development tasks, where these may consist of own ideas, smaller industrial development projects, R&D at the Faculty, or a pre-project leading to a subsequent master project. One of these tasks is then evaluated and chosen for further project planning and development within the given timeframe.Part 3: Project report and project presentation. The project work shall result in a written project report comprising all parts of the development process, which is to be submitted for evaluation. Finally, a short oral lecture is prepared where the student presents key project results.  Learning outcome:  Having finished TIP300, the students will have gained key knowledge and experience in planning and implementing a time-limited engineering and product development-task. Their knowledge shall span from an early idea and conceptual stage, with screening and mission statement, identifying and describing relevant methodology and tools for development, analysis and evaluation, to ISO-quality assurance and product liability. Furthermore, the design of necessary technical drawings, descriptions and production recommendations, and brought to a stage where digital drawings (CAD) and ISO-data for automated production (CAM) to a stage where they can be transferred to a professional branch/mechanical workshop/industry for a price estimate and production. Also, the students will have gained important knowledge of framework, rules and demands for the writing of industrial development-project reports, and later development-oriented master-reports. Course responsible:  Jan Kåre Bøe   Teachers:  Henrik Folke Holmberg, Egil Stemsrud   ECTS credits:  15   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  24   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually.   First time:  Study year 2013-2014   Preferential right:  This course has limitations of class size, and you will be notified of admittance. The following ranking is applied: 1. Students who have the course as mandatory in their study plan. 2. Students on the following study programmes: M-MPP and M-IØ-MP. 3. Students with the most ECTS credits. If there are not enough slots in group one, the students will be ranked by their ECTS credits.

Course Title: TMP100 Mechanical Engineering and Process Technology Course contents:  The course provides a "hands-on" introduction to selected key components in mechanical and process engineering. By using a project-based teaching approach for the subject the students will work in teams in order to solve a challenge. The project will give the students an opportunity to explore the basics of certain technologies and different types of components such for example engines / engine principles, pumps and compressors. The subject will also address new technological trends within topics such as energy storage and conversion, bioconversion, automation and robotics. Each student will work in groups to immerse themselves in one or more topics. Group work must take place on an independent basis with guidance from the course coordinator, where the groups must acquire knowledge of the respective topic by seeking information on their own and presenting the results to the other course participants.  Learning outcome:  After completing the course the student should know the structure and function of the important components in mechanical and process engineering in addition to in-depth knowledge about a selected subject based on the project. Course responsible:  Ola Sørby Omberg   Teachers:  Odd Ivar Lekang   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  Augustblokk.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2016-2017

Course Title: TMP160 Engineering Design Course contents:  Introduction to the content of standards for technical design. Projections, partitions, screws, intersections, welding, measures and toleranses. Development of sketches to complete parts and assemblies. Examples of integrated Rapid FEM-analysis. The course contains compulsory exercises which are done in CAD.  Learning outcome:  Having passed the course, students will have gained basic knowledge about technical design and skills in using computer-based software such as CAD. Course responsible:  Henrik Folke Holmberg   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  60   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2010-2011   Preferential right:  Ranking:1.            students who have the course as mandatory in their study plan2.            students on the following study programmes: M-MPP, M-RB and M-IØ3.            students with most ECTS creditsIt there are not enough slots in group one the students will be ranked by their ECTS credits.Students taking the course for the first time have lab priority.

Course Title: TMP220 Machine Parts and Power Systems Course contents:  In the first part of the course, important topics with regard to safe calculation and dimensioning of machine parts are emphasised. Key elements are as follows: Stresses due to static and dynamic loadings. Deformation of machine parts, design to avoid stress concentrations, metal fits and tolerances, power transmission, shafts and critical speed, coupling design, welding, screws fasteners design, breaks, springs, gears, bearings, belt/chain drives. Later in the course, machine parts and mechanisms are put into a larger perspective with regard to the development of mechanical and hydraulic power systems, such as transmissions and larger hydraulic systems. Key elements are as follows: Hydraulic valves, pumps, motors, pistons, electrical control units, mechanical and hydro-mechanical transmissions. In addition, an introduction to the use of standardised component symbols for planning mechanical and hydraulic systems is given, with practical examples from tractors, cranes, mass transfer machines, transport machinery and industrial installations etc. The course contains compulsory exercises, calculation exercises and planning exercises. The exercises focus on understanding, measuring and describing characteristics of single elements and the construction of complex installations and systems.  Learning outcome:  Through the course, students will learn how to apply elementary force calculations for machine parts and develop skills in the dimensioning of machine parts, power systems and machines. Also, they are to amass knowledge of the most used machine parts, their function and key mechanical and hydraulic systems. The students are to understand how external forces affect construction parts and what precautionary rules should be taken when dimensioning. Also, they are to understand and use the parameters, formulae, standards and criteria required for manual calculations and dimensioning with the needed security against deformation and fatigue. The students are to understand static and dynamic energy as well as force transfer through incompressible liquids and be able to calculate energy losses, efficiencies and outputs of mechanical, hydraulic and combined systems and transmissions. The students are to become familiar with standard symbols for transmission- and hydraulic elements and be able to use them in the design of simple and more complex mechanical and hydraulic systems. When the course has been completed, the students are to be able to calculate, dimension and specify machine parts, mechanical- and hydraulic systems key elements for modern machines that are used in agriculture, forestry, the building and construction sector as well as in industry and transportation. Energy efficient systems and solutions are emphasised in the course. Course responsible:  Egil Stemsrud   Teachers:  Henrik Folke Holmberg   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  36   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2009-2010   Preferential right:  Ranking:1.            students who have the course as mandatory in their study plan2.            students on the following study programmes: M-MPP, M-IØ and M-RB3.            students with most ECTS creditsIt there are not enough slots in group one the students will be ranked by their ECTS credits.

Course Title: TMP261 Heat and Flow Simulation Course contents:  The course gives an introduction to heat and flow simulation. The main program used in the course will be flow simulation from SolidWorks software. The course include lessons and exercises with tutorials on model preparation and creation of a flow simulation project. Key elements are: Meshing and thin wall optimization, electric cooling, transient heat transfer, two and three dimensional flow, conjugate heat transfer, rotating reference frames, cavitation, and load transfer from fluid analysis into stress analysis (Finite element analysis).  Learning outcome:  Having finished the course, the student shall be able to utilize modern computer simulation tools to simulate and predict heat and flow transfer. Course responsible:  Muhammad Salman Siddiqui   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  EN (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  40   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2010-2011   Preferential right:  Ranking:1.            students who have the course as mandatory in their study plan2.            students on the following study programmes: M-IØ, M-RB  and M-MPP3.            students with most ECTS credits

Course Title: TMP310 Machine- and Vehicle Dynamics Course contents:  The course consist of a 4 hours lectures and 2 hours exercises pr. week. The lectures includes, vehicles with internal combustion engines, hybrid operation, electric cars and other types of rotating machinery. The lectures also include also braking theory, steering and suspension geometry, propulsion theory, engine theory, and environmental impacts on the environment, as well as theory that deals with the interaction between engine and drivetrain. In addition, an introduction is given to equivalent mass-moments of inertia, oscillation analysis and basic safety aspects and traffic accident investigation. External lectures from the vehicle sector is also used.  Learning outcome:  After completing the course, students should be able to dimension drivetrains, brakes, wheel suspension, as well as suspension and damping systems for simple vehicles and machines. Students must know the factors that affect driving resistance and power requirements, and be able to choose engine and drivetrain solutions so that requirements for desired driving characteristics, energy consumption and environment are met. Furthermore, students must be able to perform simple vibration analyzes, propose suitable measures to reduce vibration problems and , propose actions to reduce vibration problems and have gained competence in traffic accident analysis. Course responsible:  Geir Taxth Terjesen   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2021-2022

Course Title: TMP320 Machinery and Product Development Course contents:  The course has three phases: Part 1. Basic design (August): Central topics are stress analysis and strain gages, elastic theory, composite beams and pressure/shrink connections. Part 2. Advanced design 1: Central topics are statically indeterminate beams, plasticity theory, standards, safety calculation and testing methods for complex constructions and assemblies, fatigue and lifetime calculations and stability calculations. Part 3: Advanced design 2 and project work: Fracture mechanics, Dynamic loading, energy absorption, design variables and project work. This part also includes more advanced training in Ansys WB. The project is a limited design and product development project with the submission of the report with descriptions, calculations, visualizations, and complete construction drawings. The project assignment is given by the lecturer.  Learning outcome:  Students are to gain competence in project planning and, design of complex machinery- and process-technical constructions, and in the use of computer based design and production technologies. The students are to practice development, use relevant standards and important elements of small-scale industrial production of new products. After having completed the course, the student shall have aquired knowledge on methods for calculating the properties of materials, strength and lifetime of various types of constructions and evaluate results from complex calculations and analysis tools. They shall be able to make choices concerning design and materials from considerations of strength, economy and environment, and give advice on the technical aspects of production. Course responsible:  Geir Taxth Terjesen   ECTS credits:  15   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in August block. This course has teaching/evaluation in August block, Autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2021-2022

Course Title: TMPA210 Precision Farming and Sensor Technology Course contents:  Technology and solutions for more sustainable agriculture. Participation in the Smart Farming and Green Innovation NMBU Sustainable plattform  (2021-24) and Green Innovation Student LAB.. Precision farming. GNSS / GIS/ IoT. Agriculture 4.0. Digitalization  in agriculture. Automation. Use of sensors, drones and field robotics in Agricultural engineering. Soil cultivation, tillage and soil preservation. How to reduce soil compaction. Machinery for seeding and planting of crops. Distribution of fertilisers. Cultivation and handling of potatoes. Power and base machinery for agriculture. Chemical and alternative pest control. Inspection and certification of sprayers.Students may follow autorization course for proper handling av pesticide (license to use of pesticides). *)Green Innovation Student LAB is a makerspace promoting studentactivated learning and innovation mainly in the field through different projects by using sensors, robots an drones among others togehter with researchers and other stakeholders.  Learning outcome:  The students should gain knowledge about agrotechnical solutions and methods to ensure product quality and reduce environmental impact in agriculture, as well as an overview over important measures and their consequences.  The student shall  obtain a fully understanding of precision farming and how  this better can be implemented in Norwegian agriculture.The students should also be able to understand how agricultural machinery functions and interacts in a broader agronomic perspective. This means not just mechanical behaviour, but to a large degree how different types of machinery, tuning and utilisation must be adapted to farming structure, soil conditions, biological and climatic conditions etc. Course responsible:  Nils Bjugstad   Teachers:  Jon Glenn Omholt Gjevestad   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  Normally, a minimum number of 10 students are required in order to follow the described schedule.A number of 5-10 students may be run by an adapted project & lecture solution.   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel.   Course frequency:  Anually   First time:  Study year 2007-2008   Preferential right:  Students taking Horticulture and Crop Science, Economics, Animal Sciences, Technology. Students also from other directions may participate. Precision agriculture  is a multi displinary topic itself.

Course Title: TMPA220 Landscape Engineering, Plant Establishment and Management Course contents:  Working principles and design of machinery for planting, establishment, fertilization, liming, soil and soil structure improvements, aeriation, conservation, cutting, removal of weeds and unwanted vegetation, cleaning and treatment of waste, transport, removal of snow and maintenance of roads. Good management. Workplace design and ergonomics. Machinery cooperation and organisation, purchasing, maintenance and care for machinery. Demonstrations and exercises. Drainage and irrigation are part of other courses.  Learning outcome:  Having completed the course, students will have acquired knowledge about methods and equipment for parks, sporting grounds, greens and cultural and recreational landscape in general. The students should be able to identify and suggest suitable mechanisation, care and maintenance schemes for parks and greens. The student is qualified to act as manager for mechanisation in this field, and be able to suggest and plan environmentally sustainable mangement solutions. Course responsible:  Nils Bjugstad   Teachers:  Tom Ringstad   ECTS credits:  7.5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  24   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel. Because some student projects are based on biological activity and thus may be carried out firstly in the mid of May, these projects are evaluated and presented at the end of May. However, all students have to take part both of these days for presentations of the project work.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2017-2018   Preferential right:  Ranking:1.            students who have the course as mandatory in their study plan2.            students on the following study programmes: B-LI, M-LA og M-PV3.            students with most ECTS creditsIt there are not enough slots in group one the students will be ranked by their ECTS credits.

Course Title: TMPP251 Energy and Process Technology Course contents:  The focus in the course will be dimensjoning of different industrial processes. Lectures will be given in distillation, gas absorption and stripping, drying, mechanical/physical separation methods, liquid extraction of solid material and membrane filtration. Calculations,dimensioning and energy balances will be an important part of the course. The industrial processes are chosen because they are relevant in the oil industry, chemical industry, waste water treatment and food industry.  Learning outcome:  The student shall be able to calculate the physical dimensjons of industrial processes, in addition to being able to carry out mass and energy balances. Course responsible:  Volha Shapaval   ECTS credits:  5   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2011-2012

Course Title: TMPP350 Energy and Process Technology Main Topic Course contents:  The main part of the course is an individual assignment where the student shall plan an industrial production process, with the main focus on bioprocesses. Examples of such processes are Biorefinery, industrial production of bioethanol, biodiesel, fermentation, production of microbial biomass. In addition a description of some unit operations will be done, particularly units that are relevant for the assignment. The course will contain energi and mass balance calculations. If practical, there will be a visit to a relevant industrial plant.  Learning outcome:  The course will give the student knowledge on how to put together several unit operations into a production unit. Dimentioning the different units so that they are adapted to each other is central. Additionally the students will gain knowledge in how to perform energi and mass balance calculations.  Course responsible:  Volha Shapaval, Even Bull Holmen   ECTS credits:  15   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2003-2004

Course Title: TPS200 Fluid Mechanics 1: Introduction Course contents:  Mechanical properties of fluids. Fluids at rest and in equilibrium (hydrostatics). Kinematics of fluid motion. The Euler equation and Bernoulli equation for inviscid flow. Reynold's transport theorem. The continuity equation, momentum equation and energy equation on integral form. Boundary layers (simple). Steady flow of incompressible fluids in conduits and open channels, including energy losses. Dimensional analysis, Buckingham's pi theorem, similitude. Lift and drag on objects. Glimpses of ideal inviscid flow analysis, Navier-Stokes equations and CFD. Laboratory exercises illustrate important flow phenomena.  Learning outcome:  The students should understand and be able to describe the principles of fluid mechanics and apply these for solving practical problems. The students should be able to apply fundamental physical laws - mainly in control volume form - to fluids in motion, and on this basis give a mathematical description of simple flow phenomena. The students should be able to use this for solving problems related to flow of liquids in pipes and open channels. The students should be able to conduct simple experiments on moving fluids. Course responsible:  Vegard Nilsen   Teachers:  Thomas Kringlebotn Thiis   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Spring parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Spring parallel, .   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2018-2019

Course Title: TPS210 Fluid Mechanics 2: Engineering Course contents:  The course expands on TPS200 (Fluid mechanics 1: Introduction), and applies the concepts from that course for analysing piped transport systems for liquids and gases (water distribution systems, ventilation systems etc.). Topics covered include measurement techniques for liquids, unsteady pipe flow, water hammer, pumps and pumping systems, water turbines, cavitation in pumps and turbines, similarity laws for pumps and turubines, fans and ventilation systems, flow in pipe networks. The course has a compulsory laboratory component where concepts from the lectures are demonstrated in practice. The laboratory exercises include: flow rate measurement principles, flow through nozzles and orifices, characterisation of pumps, fans and turbines, adjustment of ventilation systems, water hammer, use of software (EPANET) for analysing flow in pressurized pipe networks.  Learning outcome:  On completion of the course, the students should be able to analyse pipe transport systems and hydraulic machinery for liquids and gases and thereby posess the necessary knowledge for designing such systems. The knowledge may be applied to water and waste water systems, other hydraulic systems and gas transport systems (ventilation systems). Course responsible:  Vegard Nilsen   Teachers:  Thomas Kringlebotn Thiis   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  This course starts in Autumn parallel. This course has teaching/evaluation in Autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annually   First time:  Study year 2003-2004

Course Title: VU-PPFN200 Professional specialization in agriculture, fishery, forestry and nature management Course contents:  .  Learning outcome:  . Course responsible:  Kristian Bergersen   Teachers:  Erling Krogh   ECTS credits:  15   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  .   Teaching exam periods:  .   Course frequency:  .   First time:  Study year 2020-2021

Course Title: VU-PPMD230 . Course contents:  .  Learning outcome:  . Course responsible:  Joakim Skogholt, Stine Marie Fykse Haraldsen   ECTS credits:  15   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  .   Teaching exam periods:  .   Course frequency:  .   First time:  Study year 2020-2021   Preferential right:  .

Course Title: VU-PPMD240 Videreutdanning i matematikk 2 - Problemløsing, tallteori og matematikkdidaktikk Course contents:  .  Learning outcome:  . Course responsible:  Joakim Skogholt, Stine Marie Fykse Haraldsen   ECTS credits:  15   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Teaching exam periods:  .   Course frequency:  .   First time:  Study year 2020-2021

Course Title: VU-PPTN200 Interdisciplinarity in science, agriculture, fishery, forestry and nature management Course contents:  .  Learning outcome:  . Course responsible:  Martine Charlotte Liland   Teachers:  Erling Krogh   ECTS credits:  15   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  .   Teaching exam periods:  .   Course frequency:  .   First time:  Study year 2020-2021   Preferential right:  .

Course Title: VU-PPUN200 Teaching and Learning in Higher Education - Technical and administrative Staff Course contents:  The course addresses topics that are central to developing competence to promote good teaching and learning. After completing the course, participants should be able to facilitate student learning by assessing, selecting and justifying appropriate goals and content for their teaching programs, and finding methods that are appropriate in relation to this in the subject area they teach.  Learning outcome:  KnowledgeThe candidate can explainlearning theories that are relevant to their teachingrelevant didactic questions and approaches within their subjectthe principles that can be used in the planning of teachinghow the study program that one's teaching belongs to is built up how one as a technical / administrative employee can apply his / her competence in this principles how to guide individual students and groupscurrent teaching methods and teaching principles, ranging from lecture to problem-based learninghow to analyze and describe work tasks and how to specify the skills needed to perform the tasksdifferent types of assesmenthow study quality work and evaluation of teaching are organized at NMBUNMBU's philosophy of learning and its theoretical and practical implications.                                          SkillsThe candidate canapply the above knowledge to increase their teaching in the individual session and over time with a view to promoting student learninghelp develop the learning environment among students and staffreflect on their teaching and develop it furtherfind subject material that can illuminate questions one encounters in the design and development of one's own teaching.General competenceThe candidate haveinsight into ethical issues that can enroll in teaching and can express to implied which considerations must be taken into accountcan communicate own development work orally and in writingcan communicate with other teachers involved in the current subject and study program on how the teaching should be organized, and in this context be able to point to relevant educational perspectives. Course responsible:  Linda Helén Godager   Teachers:  Knut Omholt, Sigrid Marie Gjøtterud, Hans Erik Lefdal   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  20   Teaching exam periods:  The course starts in the spring parallel. The course has teaching / assessment in the spring and autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annual   First time:  Study year 2004-2005   Last time:  2022H

Course Title: VU-PPUN300 Teaching and Learning in Higher Education - Technical and administrative Staff Course contents:  The course addresses topics that are central to developing competence to promote good teaching and learning. After completing the course, participants should be able to facilitate student learning by assessing, selecting and justifying appropriate goals and content for their teaching programs, and finding methods that are appropriate in relation to this in the subject area they teach.VU-PPUN300 will provide basic competence in university pedagogy (equivalent to PPUN400), by supplementing with a reflection note and a one-day seminar.  Learning outcome:  KnowledgeThe candidate can explainlearning theories that are relevant to their teachingrelevant didactic questions and approaches within their subjectthe principles that can be used in the planning of teachinghow the study program that one's teaching belongs to is built up how one as a technical / administrative employee can apply his / her competence in this principles how to guide individual students and groupscurrent teaching methods and teaching principles, ranging from lecture to problem-based learninghow to analyze and describe work tasks and how to specify the skills needed to perform the tasksdifferent types of assesmenthow study quality work and evaluation of teaching are organized at NMBUNMBU's philosophy of learning and its theoretical and practical implications.                                          SkillsThe candidate canapply the above knowledge to increase their teaching in the individual session and over time with a view to promoting student learninghelp develop the learning environment among students and staffreflect on their teaching and develop it furtherfind subject material that can illuminate questions one encounters in the design and development of one's own teaching.General competenceThe candidate haveinsight into ethical issues that can enroll in teaching and can express to implied which considerations must be taken into accountcan communicate own development work orally and in writingcan communicate with other teachers involved in the current subject and study program on how the teaching should be organized, and in this context be able to point to relevant educational perspectives. Course responsible:  Linda Helén Godager   Teachers:  Nina Elisabeth Arnesen, Knut Omholt, Hans Erik Lefdal   ECTS credits:  10   Faculty:  Faculty of Science and Technology   Teaching language:  NO (NO=norsk, EN=Engelsk)   Limits of class size:  20   Teaching exam periods:  The course starts in the spring parallel. The course has teaching / assessment in the spring and autumn parallel.   Course frequency:  Annual   First time:  Study year 2022-2023

